the project gutenberg ebook of war and peace, by leo tolstoy
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use
it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this
ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org
*** start of this project gutenberg ebook war and peace ***
an anonymous volunteer, and david widger
    chapter xxii
    chapter xxiii
    chapter xxii
    chapter xxii
    chapter xxiii
    book eight: 1811 - 12
    chapter xxii
    chapter xxii
    chapter xxiii
    chapter xxii
    chapter xxiii
    chapter xxxii
    chapter xxxiii
    chapter xxxix
    chapter xxii
    chapter xxiii
    chapter xxxii
    chapter xxxiii
    book thirteen: 1812
“well, prince, so genoa and lucca are now just family estates of the
buonapartes. but i warn you, if you don’t tell me that this means war,
if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by that
antichrist—i really believe he is antichrist—i will have nothing
more to do with you and you are no longer my friend, no longer my
‘faithful slave,’ as you call yourself! but how do you do? i see i
have frightened you—sit down and tell me all the news.”
it was in july, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known anna pávlovna
schérer, maid of honor and favorite of the empress márya fëdorovna.
with these words she greeted prince vasíli kurágin, a man of high
rank and importance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. anna
pávlovna had had a cough for some days. she was, as she said, suffering
from la grippe; grippe being then a new word in st. petersburg, used
all her invitations without exception, written in french, and delivered
by a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:
“if you have nothing better to do, count (or prince), and if the
prospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible,
i shall be very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10—annette
“heavens! what a virulent attack!” replied the prince, not in the
least disconcerted by this reception. he had just entered, wearing an
embroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had stars on
his breast and a serene expression on his flat face. he spoke in that
refined french in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought, and
with the gentle, patronizing intonation natural to a man of importance
who had grown old in society and at court. he went up to anna pávlovna,
kissed her hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, and shining head,
“first of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. set your friend’s
mind at rest,” said he without altering his tone, beneath the
politeness and affected sympathy of which indifference and even irony
“can one be well while suffering morally? can one be calm in times
like these if one has any feeling?” said anna pávlovna. “you are
“and the fete at the english ambassador’s? today is wednesday. i
must put in an appearance there,” said the prince. “my daughter is
“i thought today’s fete had been canceled. i confess all these
festivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome.”
“if they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have
been put off,” said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force
of habit said things he did not even wish to be believed.
“don’t tease! well, and what has been decided about novosíltsev’s
“what can one say about it?” replied the prince in a cold, listless
tone. “what has been decided? they have decided that buonaparte has
burnt his boats, and i believe that we are ready to burn ours.”
prince vasíli always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a stale
part. anna pávlovna schérer on the contrary, despite her forty years,
overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. to be an enthusiast had
become her social vocation and, sometimes even when she did not
feel like it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the
expectations of those who knew her. the subdued smile which, though it
did not suit her faded features, always played round her lips expressed,
as in a spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her charming defect,
which she neither wished, nor could, nor considered it necessary, to
in the midst of a conversation on political matters anna pávlovna burst
“oh, don’t speak to me of austria. perhaps i don’t understand
things, but austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war. she
is betraying us! russia alone must save europe. our gracious sovereign
recognizes his high vocation and will be true to it. that is the one
thing i have faith in! our good and wonderful sovereign has to perform
the noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous and noble that god will
not forsake him. he will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of
revolution, which has become more terrible than ever in the person of
this murderer and villain! we alone must avenge the blood of the just
one.... whom, i ask you, can we rely on?... england with her commercial
spirit will not and cannot understand the emperor alexander’s
loftiness of soul. she has refused to evacuate malta. she wanted to
find, and still seeks, some secret motive in our actions. what answer
did novosíltsev get? none. the english have not understood and cannot
understand the self-abnegation of our emperor who wants nothing for
himself, but only desires the good of mankind. and what have they
promised? nothing! and what little they have promised they will not
perform! prussia has always declared that buonaparte is invincible, and
that all europe is powerless before him.... and i don’t believe a
word that hardenburg says, or haugwitz either. this famous prussian
neutrality is just a trap. i have faith only in god and the lofty
destiny of our adored monarch. he will save europe!”
she suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.
“i think,” said the prince with a smile, “that if you had been
sent instead of our dear wintzingerode you would have captured the king
of prussia’s consent by assault. you are so eloquent. will you give me
“in a moment. À propos,” she added, becoming calm again, “i am
expecting two very interesting men tonight, le vicomte de mortemart, who
is connected with the montmorencys through the rohans, one of the best
french families. he is one of the genuine émigrés, the good ones. and
also the abbé morio. do you know that profound thinker? he has been
“i shall be delighted to meet them,” said the prince. “but
tell me,” he added with studied carelessness as if it had only just
occurred to him, though the question he was about to ask was the chief
motive of his visit, “is it true that the dowager empress wants
baron funke to be appointed first secretary at vienna? the baron by all
accounts is a poor creature.”
prince vasíli wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were
trying through the dowager empress márya fëdorovna to secure it for
anna pávlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor
anyone else had a right to criticize what the empress desired or was
“baron funke has been recommended to the dowager empress by her
sister,” was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.
as she named the empress, anna pávlovna’s face suddenly assumed an
expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with
sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
patroness. she added that her majesty had deigned to show baron funke
beaucoup d’estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.
the prince was silent and looked indifferent. but, with the womanly and
courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, anna pávlovna
wished both to rebuke him (for daring to speak as he had done of a man
recommended to the empress) and at the same time to console him, so she
“now about your family. do you know that since your daughter came
out everyone has been enraptured by her? they say she is amazingly
the prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.
“i often think,” she continued after a short pause, drawing nearer
to the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political
and social topics were ended and the time had come for intimate
conversation—“i often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life
are distributed. why has fate given you two such splendid children?
i don’t speak of anatole, your youngest. i don’t like him,” she
added in a tone admitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows.
“two such charming children. and really you appreciate them less than
anyone, and so you don’t deserve to have them.”
and she smiled her ecstatic smile.
“i can’t help it,” said the prince. “lavater would have said i
“don’t joke; i mean to have a serious talk with you. do you know
i am dissatisfied with your younger son? between ourselves” (and her
face assumed its melancholy expression), “he was mentioned at her
the prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly,
“what would you have me do?” he said at last. “you know i did all
a father could for their education, and they have both turned out fools.
hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but anatole is an active one. that
is the only difference between them.” he said this smiling in a way
more natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round
his mouth very clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse and
“and why are children born to such men as you? if you were not a
father there would be nothing i could reproach you with,” said anna
“i am your faithful slave and to you alone i can confess that my
children are the bane of my life. it is the cross i have to bear. that
is how i explain it to myself. it can’t be helped!”
he said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a
“have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son anatole?” she
asked. “they say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though i
don’t feel that weakness in myself as yet, i know a little person who
is very unhappy with her father. she is a relation of yours, princess
prince vasíli did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory and
perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a movement of
the head that he was considering this information.
“do you know,” he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad
current of his thoughts, “that anatole is costing me forty thousand
rubles a year? and,” he went on after a pause, “what will it be in
five years, if he goes on like this?” presently he added: “that’s
what we fathers have to put up with.... is this princess of yours
“her father is very rich and stingy. he lives in the country. he is
the well-known prince bolkónski who had to retire from the army under
the late emperor, and was nicknamed ‘the king of prussia.’ he is
very clever but eccentric, and a bore. the poor girl is very unhappy.
she has a brother; i think you know him, he married lise meinen lately.
he is an aide-de-camp of kutúzov’s and will be here tonight.”
“listen, dear annette,” said the prince, suddenly taking anna
pávlovna’s hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. “arrange
that affair for me and i shall always be your most devoted slave-slafe
with an f, as a village elder of mine writes in his reports. she is rich
and of good family and that’s all i want.”
and with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raised the
maid of honor’s hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and fro
as he lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction.
“attendez,” said anna pávlovna, reflecting, “i’ll speak to
lise, young bolkónski’s wife, this very evening, and perhaps the
thing can be arranged. it shall be on your family’s behalf that i’ll
start my apprenticeship as old maid.”
anna pávlovna’s drawing room was gradually filling. the highest
petersburg society was assembled there: people differing widely in age
and character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged.
prince vasíli’s daughter, the beautiful hélène, came to take her
father to the ambassador’s entertainment; she wore a ball dress and
her badge as maid of honor. the youthful little princess bolkónskaya,
known as la femme la plus séduisante de pétersbourg, * was also there.
she had been married during the previous winter, and being pregnant did
not go to any large gatherings, but only to small receptions. prince
vasíli’s son, hippolyte, had come with mortemart, whom he introduced.
     * the most fascinating woman in petersburg.
to each new arrival anna pávlovna said, “you have not yet seen my
aunt,” or “you do not know my aunt?” and very gravely conducted
him or her to a little old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her
cap, who had come sailing in from another room as soon as the guests
began to arrive; and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her
aunt, anna pávlovna mentioned each one’s name and then left them.
each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom not
one of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of them
cared about; anna pávlovna observed these greetings with mournful and
solemn interest and silent approval. the aunt spoke to each of them in
the same words, about their health and her own, and the health of her
though politeness prevented his showing impatience, left the old woman
with a sense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not
return to her the whole evening.
the young princess bolkónskaya had brought some work in a
gold-embroidered velvet bag. her pretty little upper lip, on which a
delicate dark down was just perceptible, was too short for her teeth,
but it lifted all the more sweetly, and was especially charming when she
occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. as is always the case
with a thoroughly attractive woman, her defect—the shortness of her
upper lip and her half-open mouth—seemed to be her own special and
peculiar form of beauty. everyone brightened at the sight of this pretty
young woman, so soon to become a mother, so full of life and health, and
carrying her burden so lightly. old men and dull dispirited young ones
who looked at her, after being in her company and talking to her a
little while, felt as if they too were becoming, like her, full of life
and health. all who talked to her, and at each word saw her bright smile
and the constant gleam of her white teeth, thought that they were in a
specially amiable mood that day.
the little princess went round the table with quick, short, swaying
steps, her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress sat
down on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was a
pleasure to herself and to all around her. “i have brought my work,”
said she in french, displaying her bag and addressing all present.
“mind, annette, i hope you have not played a wicked trick on me,”
she added, turning to her hostess. “you wrote that it was to be quite
a small reception, and just see how badly i am dressed.” and she
spread out her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty gray
dress, girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.
“soyez tranquille, lise, you will always be prettier than anyone
“you know,” said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in
french, turning to a general, “my husband is deserting me? he is going
to get himself killed. tell me what this wretched war is for?” she
added, addressing prince vasíli, and without waiting for an answer she
turned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful hélène.
“what a delightful woman this little princess is!” said prince
one of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with
close-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionable
at that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. this stout
young man was an illegitimate son of count bezúkhov, a well-known
grandee of catherine’s time who now lay dying in moscow. the young man
had not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had only
just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was his
first appearance in society. anna pávlovna greeted him with the nod she
accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. but in spite of
this lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the sight
of something too large and unsuited to the place, came over her face
when she saw pierre enter. though he was certainly rather bigger than
the other men in the room, her anxiety could only have reference to
the clever though shy, but observant and natural, expression which
distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.
“it is very good of you, monsieur pierre, to come and visit a poor
invalid,” said anna pávlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her
pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued to look round as
if in search of something. on his way to the aunt he bowed to the little
princess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.
anna pávlovna’s alarm was justified, for pierre turned away from the
aunt without waiting to hear her speech about her majesty’s health.
anna pávlovna in dismay detained him with the words: “do you know the
abbé morio? he is a most interesting man.”
“yes, i have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is very
“you think so?” rejoined anna pávlovna in order to say something
and get away to attend to her duties as hostess. but pierre now
committed a reverse act of impoliteness. first he had left a lady before
she had finished speaking to him, and now he continued to speak to
another who wished to get away. with his head bent, and his big feet
spread apart, he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbé’s
“we will talk of it later,” said anna pávlovna with a smile.
and having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, she
resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, ready
to help at any point where the conversation might happen to flag. as
the foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goes
round and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one that
creaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to check the
machine or set it in proper motion, so anna pávlovna moved about her
drawing room, approaching now a silent, now a too-noisy group, and by a
word or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady,
proper, and regular motion. but amid these cares her anxiety about
pierre was evident. she kept an anxious watch on him when he approached
the group round mortemart to listen to what was being said there, and
again when he passed to another group whose center was the abbé.
pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at anna
pávlovna’s was the first he had attended in russia. he knew that all
the intellectual lights of petersburg were gathered there and, like a
child in a toyshop, did not know which way to look, afraid of missing
any clever conversation that was to be heard. seeing the self-confident
and refined expression on the faces of those present he was always
expecting to hear something very profound. at last he came up to morio.
here the conversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an
opportunity to express his own views, as young people are fond of doing.
anna pávlovna’s reception was in full swing. the spindles hummed
steadily and ceaselessly on all sides. with the exception of the aunt,
beside whom sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn face
was rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole company had
settled into three groups. one, chiefly masculine, had formed round
the abbé. another, of young people, was grouped round the beautiful
princess hélène, prince vasíli’s daughter, and the little princess
bolkónskaya, very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump for her age.
the third group was gathered round mortemart and anna pávlovna.
the vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features and polished
manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out of
politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle in
which he found himself. anna pávlovna was obviously serving him up as
a treat to her guests. as a clever maître d’hôtel serves up as a
specially choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen it in
the kitchen would have cared to eat, so anna pávlovna served up to
her guests, first the vicomte and then the abbé, as peculiarly choice
morsels. the group about mortemart immediately began discussing the
murder of the duc d’enghien. the vicomte said that the duc d’enghien
had perished by his own magnanimity, and that there were particular
“ah, yes! do tell us all about it, vicomte,” said anna pávlovna,
with a pleasant feeling that there was something à la louis xv in the
sound of that sentence: “contez nous çela, vicomte.”
the vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness to
comply. anna pávlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone to
“the vicomte knew the duc personally,” whispered anna pávlovna to
one of the guests. “the vicomte is a wonderful raconteur,” said she
to another. “how evidently he belongs to the best society,” said she
to a third; and the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest
and most advantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beef
the vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.
“come over here, hélène, dear,” said anna pávlovna to the
beautiful young princess who was sitting some way off, the center of
the princess smiled. she rose with the same unchanging smile with which
she had first entered the room—the smile of a perfectly beautiful
woman. with a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss
and ivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparkling
diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her, not looking
at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each the
privilege of admiring her beautiful figure and shapely shoulders,
back, and bosom—which in the fashion of those days were very much
exposed—and she seemed to bring the glamour of a ballroom with her as
she moved toward anna pávlovna. hélène was so lovely that not only
did she not show any trace of coquetry, but on the contrary she even
appeared shy of her unquestionable and all too victorious beauty. she
seemed to wish, but to be unable, to diminish its effect.
“how lovely!” said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted his
shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something extraordinary
when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also with her
“madame, i doubt my ability before such an audience,” said he,
the princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considered
a reply unnecessary. she smilingly waited. all the time the story was
being told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautiful round arm,
altered in shape by its pressure on the table, now at her still more
beautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. from time
to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and whenever the story
produced an effect she glanced at anna pávlovna, at once adopted just
the expression she saw on the maid of honor’s face, and again relapsed
the little princess had also left the tea table and followed hélène.
“wait a moment, i’ll get my work.... now then, what are you
thinking of?” she went on, turning to prince hippolyte. “fetch me my
there was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talking
merrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in her
“now i am all right,” she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, she
prince hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle and
moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.
le charmant hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance
to his beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that in spite of
this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. his features were like his
sister’s, but while in her case everything was lit up by a joyous,
self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by the
wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the contrary
was dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen
self-confidence, while his body was thin and weak. his eyes, nose, and
mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace, and his arms
and legs always fell into unnatural positions.
“it’s not going to be a ghost story?” said he, sitting down beside
the princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without this
instrument he could not begin to speak.
“why no, my dear fellow,” said the astonished narrator, shrugging
“because i hate ghost stories,” said prince hippolyte in a tone
which showed that he only understood the meaning of his words after he
he spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be sure
whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. he was dressed in
a dark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe
effrayée, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
the vicomte told his tale very neatly. it was an anecdote, then current,
to the effect that the duc d’enghien had gone secretly to paris to
visit mademoiselle george; that at her house he came upon bonaparte,
who also enjoyed the famous actress’ favors, and that in his presence
napoleon happened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was
subject, and was thus at the duc’s mercy. the latter spared him, and
this magnanimity bonaparte subsequently repaid by death.
the story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point
where the rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies looked
“charming!” said anna pávlovna with an inquiring glance at the
“charming!” whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into
her work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story
prevented her from going on with it.
the vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully
prepared to continue, but just then anna pávlovna, who had kept a
watchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he was
talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbé, so she hurried to the
rescue. pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbé about
the balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by the young
man’s simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his pet theory. both
were talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally, which was why
“the means are ... the balance of power in europe and the rights of
the people,” the abbé was saying. “it is only necessary for one
powerful nation like russia—barbaric as she is said to be—to place
herself disinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for its object
the maintenance of the balance of power of europe, and it would save the
“but how are you to get that balance?” pierre was beginning.
at that moment anna pávlovna came up and, looking severely at pierre,
asked the italian how he stood russian climate. the italian’s
face instantly changed and assumed an offensively affected, sugary
expression, evidently habitual to him when conversing with women.
“i am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the
society, more especially of the feminine society, in which i have had
the honor of being received, that i have not yet had time to think of
not letting the abbé and pierre escape, anna pávlovna, the more
conveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into the
just then another visitor entered the drawing room: prince andrew
bolkónski, the little princess’ husband. he was a very handsome young
man, of medium height, with firm, clearcut features. everything about
him, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step,
offered a most striking contrast to his quiet, little wife. it was
evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing room, but had
found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to
them. and among all these faces that he found so tedious, none seemed
to bore him so much as that of his pretty wife. he turned away from
her with a grimace that distorted his handsome face, kissed anna
pávlovna’s hand, and screwing up his eyes scanned the whole company.
“you are off to the war, prince?” said anna pávlovna.
“general kutúzov,” said bolkónski, speaking french and stressing
the last syllable of the general’s name like a frenchman, “has been
“she will go to the country.”
“are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?”
“andré,” said his wife, addressing her husband in the same
coquettish manner in which she spoke to other men, “the vicomte has
been telling us such a tale about mademoiselle george and buonaparte!”
prince andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. pierre, who from
the moment prince andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,
affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. before he looked round
prince andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was
touching his arm, but when he saw pierre’s beaming face he gave him an
“there now!... so you, too, are in the great world?” said he to
“i knew you would be here,” replied pierre. “i will come to supper
with you. may i?” he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the
“no, impossible!” said prince andrew, laughing and pressing
pierre’s hand to show that there was no need to ask the question. he
wished to say something more, but at that moment prince vasíli and his
daughter got up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass.
“you must excuse me, dear vicomte,” said prince vasíli to the
frenchman, holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent
his rising. “this unfortunate fete at the ambassador’s deprives me
of a pleasure, and obliges me to interrupt you. i am very sorry to leave
your enchanting party,” said he, turning to anna pávlovna.
his daughter, princess hélène, passed between the chairs, lightly
holding up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more
radiantly on her beautiful face. pierre gazed at her with rapturous,
almost frightened, eyes as she passed him.
in passing prince vasíli seized pierre’s hand and said to anna
pávlovna: “educate this bear for me! he has been staying with me
a whole month and this is the first time i have seen him in society.
nothing is so necessary for a young man as the society of clever
anna pávlovna smiled and promised to take pierre in hand. she knew his
father to be a connection of prince vasíli’s. the elderly lady who
had been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook prince
vasíli in the anteroom. all the affectation of interest she had assumed
had left her kindly and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety
“how about my son borís, prince?” said she, hurrying after him into
the anteroom. “i can’t remain any longer in petersburg. tell me what
news i may take back to my poor boy.”
although prince vasíli listened reluctantly and not very politely
to the elderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him an
ingratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might not go
“what would it cost you to say a word to the emperor, and then he
would be transferred to the guards at once?” said she.
“believe me, princess, i am ready to do all i can,” answered prince
vasíli, “but it is difficult for me to ask the emperor. i should
advise you to appeal to rumyántsev through prince golítsyn. that would
the elderly lady was a princess drubetskáya, belonging to one of the
best families in russia, but she was poor, and having long been out of
society had lost her former influential connections. she had now come to
petersburg to procure an appointment in the guards for her only son.
it was, in fact, solely to meet prince vasíli that she had obtained an
invitation to anna pávlovna’s reception and had sat listening to
the vicomte’s story. prince vasíli’s words frightened her, an
embittered look clouded her once handsome face, but only for a moment;
then she smiled again and clutched prince vasíli’s arm more tightly.
“listen to me, prince,” said she. “i have never yet asked you
for anything and i never will again, nor have i ever reminded you of my
father’s friendship for you; but now i entreat you for god’s sake to
do this for my son—and i shall always regard you as a benefactor,”
she added hurriedly. “no, don’t be angry, but promise! i have asked
golítsyn and he has refused. be the kindhearted man you always were,”
she said, trying to smile though tears were in her eyes.
“papa, we shall be late,” said princess hélène, turning her
beautiful head and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she
influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be economized
if it is to last. prince vasíli knew this, and having once realized
that if he asked on behalf of all who begged of him, he would soon be
unable to ask for himself, he became chary of using his influence. but
in princess drubetskáya’s case he felt, after her second appeal,
something like qualms of conscience. she had reminded him of what was
quite true; he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in
his career. moreover, he could see by her manners that she was one of
those women—mostly mothers—who, having once made up their minds,
will not rest until they have gained their end, and are prepared if
necessary to go on insisting day after day and hour after hour, and even
to make scenes. this last consideration moved him.
“my dear anna mikháylovna,” said he with his usual familiarity and
weariness of tone, “it is almost impossible for me to do what you
ask; but to prove my devotion to you and how i respect your father’s
memory, i will do the impossible—your son shall be transferred to the
guards. here is my hand on it. are you satisfied?”
“my dear benefactor! this is what i expected from you—i knew your
“wait—just a word! when he has been transferred to the guards...”
she faltered. “you are on good terms with michael ilariónovich
kutúzov ... recommend borís to him as adjutant! then i shall be at
since his appointment as commander in chief. he told me himself that
all the moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as
“no, but do promise! i won’t let you go! my dear benefactor...”
“papa,” said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before,
“well, au revoir! good-by! you hear her?”
“then tomorrow you will speak to the emperor?”
“do promise, do promise, vasíli!” cried anna mikháylovna as he
went, with the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably
came naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed
all the old feminine arts. but as soon as the prince had gone her face
resumed its former cold, artificial expression. she returned to the
group where the vicomte was still talking, and again pretended to
listen, while waiting till it would be time to leave. her task was
“and what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at
milan?” asked anna pávlovna, “and of the comedy of the people of
genoa and lucca laying their petitions before monsieur buonaparte, and
monsieur buonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of
the nations? adorable! it is enough to make one’s head whirl! it is as
prince andrew looked anna pávlovna straight in the face with a
“‘dieu me la donne, gare à qui la touche!’’ * they say he was
very fine when he said that,” he remarked, repeating the words in
italian: “‘dio mi l’ha dato. guai a chi la tocchi!’’
     * god has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!
“i hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run
over,” anna pávlovna continued. “the sovereigns will not be able to
endure this man who is a menace to everything.”
“the sovereigns? i do not speak of russia,” said the vicomte, polite
but hopeless: “the sovereigns, madame... what have they done for louis
xvii, for the queen, or for madame elizabeth? nothing!” and he became
more animated. “and believe me, they are reaping the reward of their
betrayal of the bourbon cause. the sovereigns! why, they are sending
ambassadors to compliment the usurper.”
and sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.
prince hippolyte, who had been gazing at the vicomte for some time
through his lorgnette, suddenly turned completely round toward the
little princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing the condé
coat of arms on the table. he explained this to her with as much gravity
as if she had asked him to do it.
“bâton de gueules, engrêlé de gueules d’azur—maison condé,”
“if buonaparte remains on the throne of france a year longer,” the
vicomte continued, with the air of a man who, in a matter with which
he is better acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to others but
follows the current of his own thoughts, “things will have gone too
far. by intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, french society—i
mean good french society—will have been forever destroyed, and
he shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. pierre wished to
make a remark, for the conversation interested him, but anna pávlovna,
who had him under observation, interrupted:
“the emperor alexander,” said she, with the melancholy which
always accompanied any reference of hers to the imperial family, “has
declared that he will leave it to the french people themselves to choose
their own form of government; and i believe that once free from the
usurper, the whole nation will certainly throw itself into the arms
of its rightful king,” she concluded, trying to be amiable to the
“that is doubtful,” said prince andrew. “monsieur le vicomte quite
rightly supposes that matters have already gone too far. i think it will
“from what i have heard,” said pierre, blushing and breaking into
the conversation, “almost all the aristocracy has already gone over to
“it is the buonapartists who say that,” replied the vicomte without
looking at pierre. “at the present time it is difficult to know the
real state of french public opinion.”
“bonaparte has said so,” remarked prince andrew with a sarcastic
it was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming his
remarks at him, though without looking at him.
“‘i showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow
it,’” prince andrew continued after a short silence, again quoting
napoleon’s words. “‘i opened my antechambers and they crowded
in.’ i do not know how far he was justified in saying so.”
“not in the least,” replied the vicomte. “after the murder of the
duc even the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. if to some
people,” he went on, turning to anna pávlovna, “he ever was a hero,
after the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and one
before anna pávlovna and the others had time to smile their
appreciation of the vicomte’s epigram, pierre again broke into the
conversation, and though anna pávlovna felt sure he would say something
“the execution of the duc d’enghien,” declared monsieur pierre,
“was a political necessity, and it seems to me that napoleon
showed greatness of soul by not fearing to take on himself the whole
“dieu! mon dieu!” muttered anna pávlovna in a terrified whisper.
“what, monsieur pierre... do you consider that assassination shows
greatness of soul?” said the little princess, smiling and drawing her
“capital!” said prince hippolyte in english, and began slapping his
the vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. pierre looked solemnly at his
audience over his spectacles and continued.
“i say so,” he continued desperately, “because the bourbons fled
from the revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and napoleon alone
understood the revolution and quelled it, and so for the general good,
he could not stop short for the sake of one man’s life.”
“won’t you come over to the other table?” suggested anna
but pierre continued his speech without heeding her.
“no,” cried he, becoming more and more eager, “napoleon is great
because he rose superior to the revolution, suppressed its abuses,
preserved all that was good in it—equality of citizenship and freedom
of speech and of the press—and only for that reason did he obtain
“yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it to
commit murder he had restored it to the rightful king, i should have
“he could not do that. the people only gave him power that he might
rid them of the bourbons and because they saw that he was a great
man. the revolution was a grand thing!” continued monsieur pierre,
betraying by this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme
youth and his wish to express all that was in his mind.
“what? revolution and regicide a grand thing?... well, after that...
but won’t you come to this other table?” repeated anna pávlovna.
“rousseau’s contrat social,” said the vicomte with a tolerant
“i am not speaking of regicide, i am speaking about ideas.”
“yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide,” again interjected an
“those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most
important. what is important are the rights of man, emancipation from
prejudices, and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas napoleon
“liberty and equality,” said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at
last deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words
were, “high-sounding words which have long been discredited. who does
not love liberty and equality? even our saviour preached liberty and
equality. have people since the revolution become happier? on the
contrary. we wanted liberty, but buonaparte has destroyed it.”
prince andrew kept looking with an amused smile from pierre to the
vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. in the first moment of
pierre’s outburst anna pávlovna, despite her social experience, was
horror-struck. but when she saw that pierre’s sacrilegious words
had not exasperated the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it was
impossible to stop him, she rallied her forces and joined the vicomte in
“but, my dear monsieur pierre,” said she, “how do you explain the
fact of a great man executing a duc—or even an ordinary man who—is
“i should like,” said the vicomte, “to ask how monsieur explains
the 18th brumaire; was not that an imposture? it was a swindle, and not
at all like the conduct of a great man!”
“and the prisoners he killed in africa? that was horrible!” said the
little princess, shrugging her shoulders.
“he’s a low fellow, say what you will,” remarked prince hippolyte.
pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. his
smile was unlike the half-smile of other people. when he smiled,
his grave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by
another—a childlike, kindly, even rather silly look, which seemed to
the vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that
this young jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested. all were
“how do you expect him to answer you all at once?” said prince
andrew. “besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish
between his acts as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor.
“yes, yes, of course!” pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of
“one must admit,” continued prince andrew, “that napoleon as a man
was great on the bridge of arcola, and in the hospital at jaffa where he
gave his hand to the plague-stricken; but ... but there are other acts
which it is difficult to justify.”
prince andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of
pierre’s remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to
suddenly prince hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend,
and asking them all to be seated began:
“i was told a charming moscow story today and must treat you to it.
excuse me, vicomte—i must tell it in russian or the point will be
lost....” and prince hippolyte began to tell his story in such russian
as a frenchman would speak after spending about a year in russia.
everyone waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their
“there is in moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. she must
have two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. that was her
taste. and she had a lady’s maid, also big. she said....”
here prince hippolyte paused, evidently collecting his ideas with
livery, get up behind the carriage, and come with me while i make some
here prince hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before his
audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. several
persons, among them the elderly lady and anna pávlovna, did however
“she went. suddenly there was a great wind. the girl lost her hat and
her long hair came down....” here he could contain himself no
longer and went on, between gasps of laughter: “and the whole world
and so the anecdote ended. though it was unintelligible why he had told
it, or why it had to be told in russian, still anna pávlovna and the
others appreciated prince hippolyte’s social tact in so agreeably
ending pierre’s unpleasant and unamiable outburst. after the anecdote
the conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last
and next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when and
having thanked anna pávlovna for her charming soiree, the guests began
pierre was ungainly. stout, about the average height, broad, with huge
red hands; he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a drawing
room and still less how to leave one; that is, how to say something
particularly agreeable before going away. besides this he was
absent-minded. when he rose to go, he took up instead of his own, the
general’s three-cornered hat, and held it, pulling at the plume,
till the general asked him to restore it. all his absent-mindedness and
inability to enter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by
his kindly, simple, and modest expression. anna pávlovna turned toward
him and, with a christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his
indiscretion, nodded and said: “i hope to see you again, but i also
hope you will change your opinions, my dear monsieur pierre.”
when she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but again everybody
saw his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, “opinions are
opinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow i am.” and
prince andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders
to the footman who was helping him on with his cloak, listened
indifferently to his wife’s chatter with prince hippolyte who had also
come into the hall. prince hippolyte stood close to the pretty, pregnant
princess, and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass.
“go in, annette, or you will catch cold,” said the little princess,
taking leave of anna pávlovna. “it is settled,” she added in a low
anna pávlovna had already managed to speak to lise about the match she
contemplated between anatole and the little princess’ sister-in-law.
“i rely on you, my dear,” said anna pávlovna, also in a low tone.
“write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. au
prince hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his face
two footmen, the princess’ and his own, stood holding a shawl and
a cloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. they listened to
the french sentences which to them were meaningless, with an air of
understanding but not wishing to appear to do so. the princess as usual
spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh.
“i am very glad i did not go to the ambassador’s,” said prince
hippolyte “—so dull—. it has been a delightful evening, has it
“they say the ball will be very good,” replied the princess, drawing
up her downy little lip. “all the pretty women in society will be
“not all, for you will not be there; not all,” said prince hippolyte
smiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he
even pushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. either from
awkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after the
shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time, as
still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at her
husband. prince andrew’s eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he
“are you ready?” he asked his wife, looking past her.
prince hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashion
reached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porch
following the princess, whom a footman was helping into the carriage.
“princesse, au revoir,” cried he, stumbling with his tongue as well
the princess, picking up her dress, was taking her seat in the dark
carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; prince hippolyte, under
“allow me, sir,” said prince andrew in russian in a cold,
disagreeable tone to prince hippolyte who was blocking his path.
“i am expecting you, pierre,” said the same voice, but gently and
the postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. prince hippolyte
laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte
“well, mon cher,” said the vicomte, having seated himself beside
hippolyte in the carriage, “your little princess is very nice, very
nice indeed, quite french,” and he kissed the tips of his fingers.
hippolyte burst out laughing.
“do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs,”
continued the vicomte. “i pity the poor husband, that little officer
who gives himself the airs of a monarch.”
hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, “and you were
saying that the russian ladies are not equal to the french? one has to
pierre reaching the house first went into prince andrew’s study like
one quite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, took
from the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it was caesar’s
commentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading it in the middle.
“what have you done to mlle schérer? she will be quite ill now,”
said prince andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white
pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. he lifted his eager
face to prince andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
“that abbé is very interesting but he does not see the thing in the
right light.... in my opinion perpetual peace is possible but—i do not
know how to express it ... not by a balance of political power....”
it was evident that prince andrew was not interested in such abstract
“one can’t everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. well, have
you at last decided on anything? are you going to be a guardsman or a
diplomatist?” asked prince andrew after a momentary silence.
pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.
“really, i don’t yet know. i don’t like either the one or the
“but you must decide on something! your father expects it.”
pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbé as tutor,
and had remained away till he was twenty. when he returned to moscow
his father dismissed the abbé and said to the young man, “now go
to petersburg, look round, and choose your profession. i will agree to
anything. here is a letter to prince vasíli, and here is money. write
to me all about it, and i will help you in everything.” pierre had
already been choosing a career for three months, and had not decided
on anything. it was about this choice that prince andrew was speaking.
“but he must be a freemason,” said he, referring to the abbé whom
“that is all nonsense.” prince andrew again interrupted him, “let
us talk business. have you been to the horse guards?”
“no, i have not; but this is what i have been thinking and wanted
to tell you. there is a war now against napoleon. if it were a war for
freedom i could understand it and should be the first to enter the army;
but to help england and austria against the greatest man in the world is
prince andrew only shrugged his shoulders at pierre’s childish words.
he put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to such
nonsense, but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other
answer than the one prince andrew gave to this naïve question.
“if no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no
“very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about....”
“well, why are you going to the war?” asked pierre.
“what for? i don’t know. i must. besides that i am going....” he
paused. “i am going because the life i am leading here does not suit
the rustle of a woman’s dress was heard in the next room. prince
andrew shook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look it
had had in anna pávlovna’s drawing room. pierre removed his feet from
the sofa. the princess came in. she had changed her gown for a house
dress as fresh and elegant as the other. prince andrew rose and politely
“how is it,” she began, as usual in french, settling down briskly
and fussily in the easy chair, “how is it annette never got married?
how stupid you men all are not to have married her! excuse me for saying
so, but you have no sense about women. what an argumentative fellow you
“and i am still arguing with your husband. i can’t understand why he
wants to go to the war,” replied pierre, addressing the princess
with none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in their
the princess started. evidently pierre’s words touched her to the
“ah, that is just what i tell him!” said she. “i don’t
understand it; i don’t in the least understand why men can’t live
without wars. how is it that we women don’t want anything of the kind,
don’t need it? now you shall judge between us. i always tell him: here
he is uncle’s aide-de-camp, a most brilliant position. he is so
well known, so much appreciated by everyone. the other day at the
apráksins’ i heard a lady asking, ‘is that the famous prince
andrew?’ i did indeed.” she laughed. “he is so well received
everywhere. he might easily become aide-de-camp to the emperor. you know
the emperor spoke to him most graciously. annette and i were speaking of
pierre looked at his friend and, noticing that he did not like the
of,” said the princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which
she had spoken to hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly
ill-suited to the family circle of which pierre was almost a member.
“today when i remembered that all these delightful associations
must be broken off ... and then you know, andré...” (she looked
significantly at her husband) “i’m afraid, i’m afraid!” she
whispered, and a shudder ran down her back.
her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides
pierre and himself was in the room, and addressed her in a tone of
“what is it you are afraid of, lise? i don’t understand,” said he.
“there, what egotists men all are: all, all egotists! just for a whim
of his own, goodness only knows why, he leaves me and locks me up alone
“with my father and sister, remember,” said prince andrew gently.
“alone all the same, without my friends.... and he expects me not to
her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, giving her not a
joyful, but an animal, squirrel-like expression. she paused as if she
felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before pierre, though the
“i still can’t understand what you are afraid of,” said prince
andrew slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.
the princess blushed, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair.
“no, andrew, i must say you have changed. oh, how you have....”
“your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier,” said prince andrew.
the princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lip quivered.
prince andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked about the room.
pierre looked over his spectacles with naïve surprise, now at him and
now at her, moved as if about to rise too, but changed his mind.
“why should i mind monsieur pierre being here?” exclaimed the little
princess suddenly, her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful
grimace. “i have long wanted to ask you, andrew, why you have changed
so to me? what have i done to you? you are going to the war and have no
“lise!” was all prince andrew said. but that one word expressed
an entreaty, a threat, and above all conviction that she would herself
regret her words. but she went on hurriedly:
“you treat me like an invalid or a child. i see it all! did you behave
“lise, i beg you to desist,” said prince andrew still more
pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to
all this, rose and approached the princess. he seemed unable to bear the
“calm yourself, princess! it seems so to you because.... i assure you
i myself have experienced ... and so ... because ... no, excuse me!
an outsider is out of place here.... no, don’t distress yourself....
“no, wait, pierre! the princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of
the pleasure of spending the evening with you.”
“no, he thinks only of himself,” muttered the princess without
“lise!” said prince andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch
which indicates that patience is exhausted.
suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess’ pretty
face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. her beautiful eyes
glanced askance at her husband’s face, and her own assumed the timid,
deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its
“mon dieu, mon dieu!” she muttered, and lifting her dress with one
hand she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.
“good night, lise,” said he, rising and courteously kissing her hand
as he would have done to a stranger.
the friends were silent. neither cared to begin talking. pierre
continually glanced at prince andrew; prince andrew rubbed his forehead
“let us go and have supper,” he said with a sigh, going to the door.
they entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining room.
everything from the table napkins to the silver, china, and glass bore
that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married.
halfway through supper prince andrew leaned his elbows on the table and,
with a look of nervous agitation such as pierre had never before seen on
his face, began to talk—as one who has long had something on his mind
and suddenly determines to speak out.
“never, never marry, my dear fellow! that’s my advice: never marry
till you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of,
and until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen
her plainly as she is, or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable
mistake. marry when you are old and good for nothing—or all that is
good and noble in you will be lost. it will all be wasted on trifles.
yes! yes! yes! don’t look at me with such surprise. if you marry
expecting anything from yourself in the future, you will feel at every
step that for you all is ended, all is closed except the drawing
room, where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and an
idiot!... but what’s the good?...” and he waved his arm.
pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different and
the good-natured expression still more apparent, and gazed at his friend
“my wife,” continued prince andrew, “is an excellent woman, one
of those rare women with whom a man’s honor is safe; but, o god, what
would i not give now to be unmarried! you are the first and only one to
as he said this prince andrew was less than ever like that bolkónski
who had lolled in anna pávlovna’s easy chairs and with half-closed
eyes had uttered french phrases between his teeth. every muscle of his
thin face was now quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, in which
the fire of life had seemed extinguished, now flashed with brilliant
light. it was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary
times, the more impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid
“you don’t understand why i say this,” he continued, “but it is
the whole story of life. you talk of bonaparte and his career,” said
he (though pierre had not mentioned bonaparte), “but bonaparte when
he worked went step by step toward his goal. he was free, he had nothing
but his aim to consider, and he reached it. but tie yourself up with
a woman and, like a chained convict, you lose all freedom! and all you
have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you with
regret. drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and triviality—these are
the enchanted circle i cannot escape from. i am now going to the war,
the greatest war there ever was, and i know nothing and am fit for
nothing. i am very amiable and have a caustic wit,” continued prince
andrew, “and at anna pávlovna’s they listen to me. and that stupid
set without whom my wife cannot exist, and those women.... if you only
knew what those society women are, and women in general! my father is
right. selfish, vain, stupid, trivial in everything—that’s what
women are when you see them in their true colors! when you meet them
in society it seems as if there were something in them, but there’s
nothing, nothing, nothing! no, don’t marry, my dear fellow; don’t
“it seems funny to me,” said pierre, “that you, you should
consider yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. you have
everything before you, everything. and you....”
he did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly he
thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future.
“how can he talk like that?” thought pierre. he considered his
friend a model of perfection because prince andrew possessed in the
highest degree just the very qualities pierre lacked, and which might
be best described as strength of will. pierre was always astonished at
prince andrew’s calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary
memory, his extensive reading (he had read everything, knew everything,
and had an opinion about everything), but above all at his capacity for
work and study. and if pierre was often struck by andrew’s lack
of capacity for philosophical meditation (to which he himself was
particularly addicted), he regarded even this not as a defect but as a
even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life, praise
and commendation are essential, just as grease is necessary to wheels
that they may run smoothly.
“my part is played out,” said prince andrew. “what’s the use of
talking about me? let us talk about you,” he added after a silence,
that smile was immediately reflected on pierre’s face.
“but what is there to say about me?” said pierre, his face relaxing
into a careless, merry smile. “what am i? an illegitimate son!”
he suddenly blushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made a great
effort to say this. “without a name and without means... and it
really...” but he did not say what “it really” was. “for the
present i am free and am all right. only i haven’t the least idea what
i am to do; i wanted to consult you seriously.”
prince andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance—friendly and
affectionate as it was—expressed a sense of his own superiority.
“i am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man among our
whole set. yes, you’re all right! choose what you will; it’s all the
same. you’ll be all right anywhere. but look here: give up visiting
those kurágins and leading that sort of life. it suits you so
badly—all this debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!”
“what would you have, my dear fellow?” answered pierre, shrugging
his shoulders. “women, my dear fellow; women!”
“i don’t understand it,” replied prince andrew. “women who are
comme il faut, that’s a different matter; but the kurágins’ set of
women, ‘women and wine’ i don’t understand!”
pierre was staying at prince vasíli kurágin’s and sharing the
dissipated life of his son anatole, the son whom they were planning to
reform by marrying him to prince andrew’s sister.
“do you know?” said pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy
thought, “seriously, i have long been thinking of it.... leading such
a life i can’t decide or think properly about anything. one’s head
aches, and one spends all one’s money. he asked me for tonight, but i
“you give me your word of honor not to go?”
it was past one o’clock when pierre left his friend. it was a
cloudless, northern, summer night. pierre took an open cab intending
to drive straight home. but the nearer he drew to the house the more he
felt the impossibility of going to sleep on such a night. it was light
enough to see a long way in the deserted street and it seemed more like
morning or evening than night. on the way pierre remembered that anatole
kurágin was expecting the usual set for cards that evening, after which
there was generally a drinking bout, finishing with visits of a kind
“i should like to go to kurágin’s,” thought he.
but he immediately recalled his promise to prince andrew not to go
there. then, as happens to people of weak character, he desired so
passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed to
that he decided to go. the thought immediately occurred to him that his
promise to prince andrew was of no account, because before he gave it
he had already promised prince anatole to come to his gathering;
“besides,” thought he, “all such ‘words of honor’ are
conventional things with no definite meaning, especially if
one considers that by tomorrow one may be dead, or something so
extraordinary may happen to one that honor and dishonor will be all the
same!” pierre often indulged in reflections of this sort, nullifying
all his decisions and intentions. he went to kurágin’s.
reaching the large house near the horse guards’ barracks, in which
anatole lived, pierre entered the lighted porch, ascended the stairs,
and went in at the open door. there was no one in the anteroom; empty
bottles, cloaks, and overshoes were lying about; there was a smell of
alcohol, and sounds of voices and shouting in the distance.
cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yet dispersed.
pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, in which were the
remains of supper. a footman, thinking no one saw him, was drinking on
the sly what was left in the glasses. from the third room came sounds of
laughter, the shouting of familiar voices, the growling of a bear, and
general commotion. some eight or nine young men were crowding anxiously
round an open window. three others were romping with a young bear, one
pulling him by the chain and trying to set him at the others.
“i bet a hundred on stevens!” shouted one.
“mind, no holding on!” cried another.
“i bet on dólokhov!” cried a third. “kurágin, you part our
“there, leave bruin alone; here’s a bet on.”
“at one draught, or he loses!” shouted a fourth.
“jacob, bring a bottle!” shouted the host, a tall, handsome fellow
who stood in the midst of the group, without a coat, and with his fine
linen shirt unfastened in front. “wait a bit, you fellows.... here is
pétya! good man!” cried he, addressing pierre.
another voice, from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes,
particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober
ring, cried from the window: “come here; part the bets!” this was
dólokhov, an officer of the semënov regiment, a notorious gambler and
duelist, who was living with anatole. pierre smiled, looking about him
“wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! a bottle here,” said anatole, and
taking a glass from the table he went up to pierre.
pierre drank one glass after another, looking from under his brows at
the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window, and listening
to their chatter. anatole kept on refilling pierre’s glass while
explaining that dólokhov was betting with stevens, an english naval
officer, that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the outer ledge
of the third floor window with his legs hanging out.
“go on, you must drink it all,” said anatole, giving pierre the last
“no, i won’t,” said pierre, pushing anatole aside, and he went up
dólokhov was holding the englishman’s hand and clearly and distinctly
repeating the terms of the bet, addressing himself particularly to
dólokhov was of medium height, with curly hair and light-blue eyes. he
was about twenty-five. like all infantry officers he wore no mustache,
so that his mouth, the most striking feature of his face, was clearly
seen. the lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved. the middle
of the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closed firmly on the firm
lower one, and something like two distinct smiles played continually
round the two corners of the mouth; this, together with the resolute,
insolent intelligence of his eyes, produced an effect which made it
impossible not to notice his face. dólokhov was a man of small means
and no connections. yet, though anatole spent tens of thousands of
rubles, dólokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a
footing that all who knew them, including anatole himself, respected him
more than they did anatole. dólokhov could play all games and nearly
always won. however much he drank, he never lost his clearheadedness.
both kurágin and dólokhov were at that time notorious among the rakes
and scapegraces of petersburg.
the bottle of rum was brought. the window frame which prevented anyone
from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen, who
were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of
anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window. he wanted to
smash something. pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame, but
“you have a try, hercules,” said he, turning to pierre.
pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the oak frame out with
“take it right out, or they’ll think i’m holding on,” said
“is the englishman bragging?... eh? is it all right?” said anatole.
“first-rate,” said pierre, looking at dólokhov, who with a bottle
of rum in his hand was approaching the window, from which the light of
the sky, the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset, was visible.
dólokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto the window
sill. “listen!” cried he, standing there and addressing those in the
“i bet fifty imperials”—he spoke french that the englishman might
understand him, but he did not speak it very well—“i bet fifty
imperials ... or do you wish to make it a hundred?” added he,
“all right. fifty imperials ... that i will drink a whole bottle of
rum without taking it from my mouth, sitting outside the window on this
spot” (he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window)
“and without holding on to anything. is that right?”
anatole turned to the englishman and taking him by one of the buttons
of his coat and looking down at him—the englishman was short—began
repeating the terms of the wager to him in english.
“wait!” cried dólokhov, hammering with the bottle on the window
sill to attract attention. “wait a bit, kurágin. listen! if
anyone else does the same, i will pay him a hundred imperials. do you
the englishman nodded, but gave no indication whether he intended to
accept this challenge or not. anatole did not release him, and though
he kept nodding to show that he understood, anatole went on translating
dólokhov’s words into english. a thin young lad, an hussar of the
life guards, who had been losing that evening, climbed on the window
sill, leaned over, and looked down.
“oh! oh! oh!” he muttered, looking down from the window at the
“shut up!” cried dólokhov, pushing him away from the window. the
lad jumped awkwardly back into the room, tripping over his spurs.
placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily,
dólokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered
his legs. pressing against both sides of the window, he adjusted himself
on his seat, lowered his hands, moved a little to the right and then to
the left, and took up the bottle. anatole brought two candles and
placed them on the window sill, though it was already quite light.
dólokhov’s back in his white shirt, and his curly head, were lit
up from both sides. everyone crowded to the window, the englishman in
front. pierre stood smiling but silent. one man, older than the others
present, suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted
“i say, this is folly! he’ll be killed,” said this more sensible
“don’t touch him! you’ll startle him and then he’ll be killed.
dólokhov turned round and, again holding on with both hands, arranged
“if anyone comes meddling again,” said he, emitting the words
separately through his thin compressed lips, “i will throw him down
saying this he again turned round, dropped his hands, took the bottle
and lifted it to his lips, threw back his head, and raised his free hand
to balance himself. one of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some
broken glass remained in that position without taking his eyes from the
window and from dólokhov’s back. anatole stood erect with staring
eyes. the englishman looked on sideways, pursing up his lips. the man
who had wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw
himself on a sofa with his face to the wall. pierre hid his face, from
which a faint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed
horror and fear. all were still. pierre took his hands from his eyes.
dólokhov still sat in the same position, only his head was thrown
further back till his curly hair touched his shirt collar, and the hand
holding the bottle was lifted higher and higher and trembled with the
effort. the bottle was emptying perceptibly and rising still higher
and his head tilting yet further back. “why is it so long?” thought
pierre. it seemed to him that more than half an hour had elapsed.
suddenly dólokhov made a backward movement with his spine, and his arm
trembled nervously; this was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip
as he sat on the sloping ledge. as he began slipping down, his head and
arm wavered still more with the strain. one hand moved as if to clutch
the window sill, but refrained from touching it. pierre again covered
his eyes and thought he would never open them again. suddenly he was
aware of a stir all around. he looked up: dólokhov was standing on the
he threw the bottle to the englishman, who caught it neatly. dólokhov
“well done!... fine fellow!... there’s a bet for you!... devil take
the englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money.
dólokhov stood frowning and did not speak. pierre jumped upon the
“gentlemen, who wishes to bet with me? i’ll do the same thing!”
he suddenly cried. “even without a bet, there! tell them to bring me a
bottle. i’ll do it.... bring a bottle!”
“let him do it, let him do it,” said dólokhov, smiling.
“what next? have you gone mad?... no one would let you!... why, you go
giddy even on a staircase,” exclaimed several voices.
“i’ll drink it! let’s have a bottle of rum!” shouted pierre,
banging the table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to
they seized him by his arms; but he was so strong that everyone who
“no, you’ll never manage him that way,” said anatole. “wait a
bit and i’ll get round him.... listen! i’ll take your bet tomorrow,
but now we are all going to ——’s.”
“come on then,” cried pierre. “come on!... and we’ll take bruin
and he caught the bear, took it in his arms, lifted it from the ground,
and began dancing round the room with it.
prince vasíli kept the promise he had given to princess drubetskáya
who had spoken to him on behalf of her only son borís on the evening of
anna pávlovna’s soiree. the matter was mentioned to the emperor, an
exception made, and borís transferred into the regiment of semënov
guards with the rank of cornet. he received, however, no appointment
to kutúzov’s staff despite all anna mikháylovna’s endeavors and
entreaties. soon after anna pávlovna’s reception anna mikháylovna
returned to moscow and went straight to her rich relations, the
rostóvs, with whom she stayed when in the town and where her darling
bóry, who had only just entered a regiment of the line and was being
at once transferred to the guards as a cornet, had been educated from
childhood and lived for years at a time. the guards had already left
petersburg on the tenth of august, and her son, who had remained in
moscow for his equipment, was to join them on the march to radzivílov.
it was st. natalia’s day and the name day of two of the rostóvs—the
mother and the youngest daughter—both named nataly. ever since
the morning, carriages with six horses had been coming and going
continually, bringing visitors to the countess rostóva’s big house on
the povarskáya, so well known to all moscow. the countess herself and
her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing room with the visitors
who came to congratulate, and who constantly succeeded one another in
the countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin oriental type
of face, evidently worn out with childbearing—she had had twelve.
a languor of motion and speech, resulting from weakness, gave her a
distinguished air which inspired respect. princess anna mikháylovna
drubetskáya, who as a member of the household was also seated in the
drawing room, helped to receive and entertain the visitors. the young
people were in one of the inner rooms, not considering it necessary to
take part in receiving the visitors. the count met the guests and saw
“i am very, very grateful to you, mon cher,” or “ma chère”—he
called everyone without exception and without the slightest variation
in his tone, “my dear,” whether they were above or below him in
rank—“i thank you for myself and for our two dear ones whose name
day we are keeping. but mind you come to dinner or i shall be offended,
ma chère! on behalf of the whole family i beg you to come, mon cher!”
these words he repeated to everyone without exception or variation, and
with the same expression on his full, cheerful, clean-shaven face, the
same firm pressure of the hand and the same quick, repeated bows. as
soon as he had seen a visitor off he returned to one of those who were
still in the drawing room, drew a chair toward him or her, and jauntily
spreading out his legs and putting his hands on his knees with the air
of a man who enjoys life and knows how to live, he swayed to and
fro with dignity, offered surmises about the weather, or touched on
questions of health, sometimes in russian and sometimes in very bad but
self-confident french; then again, like a man weary but unflinching in
the fulfillment of duty, he rose to see some visitors off and, stroking
his scanty gray hairs over his bald patch, also asked them to dinner.
sometimes on his way back from the anteroom he would pass through the
conservatory and pantry into the large marble dining hall, where tables
were being set out for eighty people; and looking at the footmen, who
were bringing in silver and china, moving tables, and unfolding damask
table linen, he would call dmítri vasílevich, a man of good family and
the manager of all his affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the
enormous table would say: “well, dmítri, you’ll see that things are
all as they should be? that’s right! the great thing is the serving,
that’s it.” and with a complacent sigh he would return to the
“márya lvóvna karágina and her daughter!” announced the
countess’ gigantic footman in his bass voice, entering the drawing
room. the countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold
snuffbox with her husband’s portrait on it.
“i’m quite worn out by these callers. however, i’ll see her and
no more. she is so affected. ask her in,” she said to the footman in a
sad voice, as if saying: “very well, finish me off.”
a tall, stout, and proud-looking woman, with a round-faced smiling
daughter, entered the drawing room, their dresses rustling.
“dear countess, what an age... she has been laid up, poor child ...
at the razumóvski’s ball ... and countess apráksina ... i was
so delighted...” came the sounds of animated feminine voices,
interrupting one another and mingling with the rustling of dresses and
the scraping of chairs. then one of those conversations began which last
out until, at the first pause, the guests rise with a rustle of dresses
and say, “i am so delighted... mamma’s health... and countess
apráksina...” and then, again rustling, pass into the anteroom, put
on cloaks or mantles, and drive away. the conversation was on the chief
topic of the day: the illness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of
catherine’s day, count bezúkhov, and about his illegitimate son
pierre, the one who had behaved so improperly at anna pávlovna’s
“i am so sorry for the poor count,” said the visitor. “he is in
such bad health, and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill
“what is that?” asked the countess as if she did not know what the
visitor alluded to, though she had already heard about the cause of
count bezúkhov’s distress some fifteen times.
“that’s what comes of a modern education,” exclaimed the visitor.
“it seems that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do
as he liked, now in petersburg i hear he has been doing such terrible
things that he has been expelled by the police.”
“you don’t say so!” replied the countess.
“he chose his friends badly,” interposed anna mikháylovna.
“prince vasíli’s son, he, and a certain dólokhov have, it is said,
been up to heaven only knows what! and they have had to suffer for it.
dólokhov has been degraded to the ranks and bezúkhov’s son sent
back to moscow. anatole kurágin’s father managed somehow to get his
son’s affair hushed up, but even he was ordered out of petersburg.”
“but what have they been up to?” asked the countess.
“they are regular brigands, especially dólokhov,” replied the
visitor. “he is a son of márya ivánovna dólokhova, such a worthy
woman, but there, just fancy! those three got hold of a bear somewhere,
put it in a carriage, and set off with it to visit some actresses! the
police tried to interfere, and what did the young men do? they tied
a policeman and the bear back to back and put the bear into the moyka
canal. and there was the bear swimming about with the policeman on his
“what a nice figure the policeman must have cut, my dear!” shouted
“oh, how dreadful! how can you laugh at it, count?”
yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing.
“it was all they could do to rescue the poor man,” continued the
visitor. “and to think it is cyril vladímirovich bezúkhov’s son
who amuses himself in this sensible manner! and he was said to be so
well educated and clever. this is all that his foreign education has
done for him! i hope that here in moscow no one will receive him, in
spite of his money. they wanted to introduce him to me, but i quite
declined: i have my daughters to consider.”
“why do you say this young man is so rich?” asked the countess,
turning away from the girls, who at once assumed an air of inattention.
“his children are all illegitimate. i think pierre also is
“i should think he has a score of them.”
princess anna mikháylovna intervened in the conversation, evidently
wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in
“the fact of the matter is,” said she significantly, and also in a
half whisper, “everyone knows count cyril’s reputation.... he has
lost count of his children, but this pierre was his favorite.”
“how handsome the old man still was only a year ago!” remarked the
countess. “i have never seen a handsomer man.”
“he is very much altered now,” said anna mikháylovna. “well, as
i was saying, prince vasíli is the next heir through his wife, but the
count is very fond of pierre, looked after his education, and wrote to
the emperor about him; so that in the case of his death—and he is
so ill that he may die at any moment, and dr. lorrain has come from
petersburg—no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune, pierre
or prince vasíli. forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles! i know
it all very well for prince vasíli told me himself. besides, cyril
vladímirovich is my mother’s second cousin. he’s also my bóry’s
godfather,” she added, as if she attached no importance at all to the
“prince vasíli arrived in moscow yesterday. i hear he has come on
“yes, but between ourselves,” said the princess, “that is a
pretext. the fact is he has come to see count cyril vladímirovich,
“but do you know, my dear, that was a capital joke,” said the count;
and seeing that the elder visitor was not listening, he turned to the
young ladies. “i can just imagine what a funny figure that policeman
and as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman, his portly form
again shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one who always eats
well and, in particular, drinks well. “so do come and dine with us!”
silence ensued. the countess looked at her callers, smiling affably,
but not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they
now rose and took their leave. the visitor’s daughter was already
smoothing down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, when
suddenly from the next room were heard the footsteps of boys and girls
running to the door and the noise of a chair falling over, and a girl
of thirteen, hiding something in the folds of her short muslin frock,
darted in and stopped short in the middle of the room. it was evident
that she had not intended her flight to bring her so far. behind her in
the doorway appeared a student with a crimson coat collar, an officer
of the guards, a girl of fifteen, and a plump rosy-faced boy in a short
the count jumped up and, swaying from side to side, spread his arms wide
and threw them round the little girl who had run in.
“ah, here she is!” he exclaimed laughing. “my pet, whose name day
“ma chère, there is a time for everything,” said the countess with
feigned severity. “you spoil her, ilyá,” she added, turning to her
“how do you do, my dear? i wish you many happy returns of your name
day,” said the visitor. “what a charming child,” she added,
this black-eyed, wide-mouthed girl, not pretty but full of life—with
childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her
bodice, with black curls tossed backward, thin bare arms, little legs
in lace-frilled drawers, and feet in low slippers—was just at that
charming age when a girl is no longer a child, though the child is not
yet a young woman. escaping from her father she ran to hide her flushed
face in the lace of her mother’s mantilla—not paying the least
attention to her severe remark—and began to laugh. she laughed, and in
fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced
“do you see?... my doll... mimi... you see...” was all natásha
managed to utter (to her everything seemed funny). she leaned against
her mother and burst into such a loud, ringing fit of laughter that even
the prim visitor could not help joining in.
“now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you,” said the
mother, pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness, and turning
to the visitor she added: “she is my youngest girl.”
natásha, raising her face for a moment from her mother’s mantilla,
glanced up at her through tears of laughter, and again hid her face.
the visitor, compelled to look on at this family scene, thought it
“tell me, my dear,” said she to natásha, “is mimi a relation of
natásha did not like the visitor’s tone of condescension to childish
things. she did not reply, but looked at her seriously.
meanwhile the younger generation: borís, the officer, anna
mikháylovna’s son; nicholas, the undergraduate, the count’s eldest
son; sónya, the count’s fifteen-year-old niece, and little pétya,
his youngest boy, had all settled down in the drawing room and were
obviously trying to restrain within the bounds of decorum the excitement
and mirth that shone in all their faces. evidently in the back rooms,
from which they had dashed out so impetuously, the conversation had
been more amusing than the drawing room talk of society scandals, the
weather, and countess apráksina. now and then they glanced at one
another, hardly able to suppress their laughter.
the two young men, the student and the officer, friends from childhood,
were of the same age and both handsome fellows, though not alike. borís
was tall and fair, and his calm and handsome face had regular, delicate
features. nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression.
dark hairs were already showing on his upper lip, and his whole face
expressed impetuosity and enthusiasm. nicholas blushed when he entered
the drawing room. he evidently tried to find something to say, but
failed. borís on the contrary at once found his footing, and related
quietly and humorously how he had known that doll mimi when she was
still quite a young lady, before her nose was broken; how she had aged
during the five years he had known her, and how her head had cracked
right across the skull. having said this he glanced at natásha.
she turned away from him and glanced at her younger brother, who was
screwing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed laughter, and unable
to control herself any longer, she jumped up and rushed from the room as
fast as her nimble little feet would carry her. borís did not laugh.
“you were meaning to go out, weren’t you, mamma? do you want the
carriage?” he asked his mother with a smile.
“yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready,” she answered,
borís quietly left the room and went in search of natásha. the plump
boy ran after them angrily, as if vexed that their program had been
the only young people remaining in the drawing room, not counting the
young lady visitor and the countess’ eldest daughter (who was four
years older than her sister and behaved already like a grown-up person),
were nicholas and sónya, the niece. sónya was a slender little
brunette with a tender look in her eyes which were veiled by long
lashes, thick black plaits coiling twice round her head, and a tawny
tint in her complexion and especially in the color of her slender but
graceful and muscular arms and neck. by the grace of her movements,
by the softness and flexibility of her small limbs, and by a certain
coyness and reserve of manner, she reminded one of a pretty, half-grown
kitten which promises to become a beautiful little cat. she evidently
considered it proper to show an interest in the general conversation by
smiling, but in spite of herself her eyes under their thick long lashes
watched her cousin who was going to join the army, with such passionate
girlish adoration that her smile could not for a single instant impose
upon anyone, and it was clear that the kitten had settled down only to
spring up with more energy and again play with her cousin as soon as
they too could, like natásha and borís, escape from the drawing room.
“ah yes, my dear,” said the count, addressing the visitor and
pointing to nicholas, “his friend borís has become an officer, and
so for friendship’s sake he is leaving the university and me, his
old father, and entering the military service, my dear. and there was a
place and everything waiting for him in the archives department! isn’t
that friendship?” remarked the count in an inquiring tone.
“but they say that war has been declared,” replied the visitor.
“they’ve been saying so a long while,” said the count, “and
they’ll say so again and again, and that will be the end of it. my
dear, there’s friendship for you,” he repeated. “he’s joining
the visitor, not knowing what to say, shook her head.
“it’s not at all from friendship,” declared nicholas, flaring
up and turning away as if from a shameful aspersion. “it is not from
friendship at all; i simply feel that the army is my vocation.”
he glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor; and they were both
regarding him with a smile of approbation.
“schubert, the colonel of the pávlograd hussars, is dining with us
today. he has been here on leave and is taking nicholas back with him.
it can’t be helped!” said the count, shrugging his shoulders and
speaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him.
“i have already told you, papa,” said his son, “that if you
don’t wish to let me go, i’ll stay. but i know i am no use anywhere
except in the army; i am not a diplomat or a government clerk.—i
don’t know how to hide what i feel.” as he spoke he kept glancing
with the flirtatiousness of a handsome youth at sónya and the young
the little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at any moment
to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature.
“all right, all right!” said the old count. “he always flares up!
this buonaparte has turned all their heads; they all think of how he
rose from an ensign and became emperor. well, well, god grant it,” he
added, not noticing his visitor’s sarcastic smile.
the elders began talking about bonaparte. julie karágina turned to
“what a pity you weren’t at the arkhárovs’ on thursday. it was so
dull without you,” said she, giving him a tender smile.
the young man, flattered, sat down nearer to her with a coquettish
smile, and engaged the smiling julie in a confidential conversation
without at all noticing that his involuntary smile had stabbed the heart
of sónya, who blushed and smiled unnaturally. in the midst of his talk
he glanced round at her. she gave him a passionately angry glance, and
hardly able to restrain her tears and maintain the artificial smile
on her lips, she got up and left the room. all nicholas’ animation
vanished. he waited for the first pause in the conversation, and then
with a distressed face left the room to find sónya.
“how plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their
sleeves!” said anna mikháylovna, pointing to nicholas as he went out.
“cousinage—dangereux voisinage,” * she added.
     * cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.
“yes,” said the countess when the brightness these young people had
brought into the room had vanished; and as if answering a question no
one had put but which was always in her mind, “and how much suffering,
how much anxiety one has had to go through that we might rejoice in
them now! and yet really the anxiety is greater now than the joy. one is
always, always anxious! especially just at this age, so dangerous both
“it all depends on the bringing up,” remarked the visitor.
“yes, you’re quite right,” continued the countess. “till now i
have always, thank god, been my children’s friend and had their full
confidence,” said she, repeating the mistake of so many parents who
imagine that their children have no secrets from them. “i know i shall
always be my daughters’ first confidante, and that if nicholas, with
his impulsive nature, does get into mischief (a boy can’t help it), he
will all the same never be like those petersburg young men.”
“yes, they are splendid, splendid youngsters,” chimed in the count,
who always solved questions that seemed to him perplexing by deciding
that everything was splendid. “just fancy: wants to be an hussar.
“what a charming creature your younger girl is,” said the visitor;
“yes, a regular volcano,” said the count. “takes after me! and
what a voice she has; though she’s my daughter, i tell the truth
when i say she’ll be a singer, a second salomoni! we have engaged an
“isn’t she too young? i have heard that it harms the voice to train
“oh no, not at all too young!” replied the count. “why, our
mothers used to be married at twelve or thirteen.”
“and she’s in love with borís already. just fancy!” said the
countess with a gentle smile, looking at borís and went on, evidently
concerned with a thought that always occupied her: “now you see if i
were to be severe with her and to forbid it ... goodness knows what they
might be up to on the sly” (she meant that they would be kissing),
“but as it is, i know every word she utters. she will come running to
me of her own accord in the evening and tell me everything. perhaps i
spoil her, but really that seems the best plan. with her elder sister i
“yes, i was brought up quite differently,” remarked the handsome
elder daughter, countess véra, with a smile.
but the smile did not enhance véra’s beauty as smiles generally do;
on the contrary it gave her an unnatural, and therefore unpleasant,
expression. véra was good-looking, not at all stupid, quick at
learning, was well brought up, and had a pleasant voice; what she said
was true and appropriate, yet, strange to say, everyone—the visitors
and countess alike—turned to look at her as if wondering why she had
said it, and they all felt awkward.
“people are always too clever with their eldest children and try to
“what’s the good of denying it, my dear? our dear countess was too
clever with véra,” said the count. “well, what of that? she’s
turned out splendidly all the same,” he added, winking at véra.
the guests got up and took their leave, promising to return to dinner.
“what manners! i thought they would never go,” said the countess,
when she had seen her guests out.
when natásha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as the
conservatory. there she paused and stood listening to the conversation
in the drawing room, waiting for borís to come out. she was already
growing impatient, and stamped her foot, ready to cry at his not coming
at once, when she heard the young man’s discreet steps approaching
neither quickly nor slowly. at this natásha dashed swiftly among the
borís paused in the middle of the room, looked round, brushed a little
dust from the sleeve of his uniform, and going up to a mirror examined
his handsome face. natásha, very still, peered out from her ambush,
waiting to see what he would do. he stood a little while before the
glass, smiled, and walked toward the other door. natásha was about to
call him but changed her mind. “let him look for me,” thought she.
hardly had borís gone than sónya, flushed, in tears, and muttering
angrily, came in at the other door. natásha checked her first impulse
to run out to her, and remained in her hiding place, watching—as
under an invisible cap—to see what went on in the world. she was
experiencing a new and peculiar pleasure. sónya, muttering to herself,
kept looking round toward the drawing room door. it opened and nicholas
“sónya, what is the matter with you? how can you?” said he, running
