AWK(1P)                 POSIX Programmer's Manual                AWK(1P)
PROLOG        
       This manual page is part of the POSIX Programmer's Manual.  The
       Linux implementation of this interface may differ (consult the
       corresponding Linux manual page for details of Linux behavior),
       or the interface may not be implemented on Linux.
NAME        
       awk — pattern scanning and processing language
SYNOPSIS        
       awk [-F sepstring] [-v assignment]... program [argument...]

       awk [-F sepstring] -f progfile [-f progfile]... [-v assignment]...
            [argument...]
DESCRIPTION        
       The awk utility shall execute programs written in the awk
       programming language, which is specialized for textual data
       manipulation. An awk program is a sequence of patterns and
       corresponding actions. When input is read that matches a pattern,
       the action associated with that pattern is carried out.

       Input shall be interpreted as a sequence of records. By default,
       a record is a line, less its terminating <newline>, but this can
       be changed by using the RS built-in variable. Each record of
       input shall be matched in turn against each pattern in the
       program. For each pattern matched, the associated action shall be
       executed.

       The awk utility shall interpret each input record as a sequence
       of fields where, by default, a field is a string of non-<blank>
       non-<newline> characters. This default <blank> and <newline>
       field delimiter can be changed by using the FS built-in variable
       or the -F sepstring option. The awk utility shall denote the
       first field in a record $1, the second $2, and so on. The symbol
       $0 shall refer to the entire record; setting any other field
       causes the re-evaluation of $0. Assigning to $0 shall reset the
       values of all other fields and the NF built-in variable.
OPTIONS        
       The awk utility shall conform to the Base Definitions volume of
       POSIX.1‐2017, Section 12.2, Utility Syntax Guidelines.

       The following options shall be supported:

       -F sepstring
                 Define the input field separator. This option shall be
                 equivalent to:

                     -v FS=sepstring

                 except that if -F sepstring and -v FS=sepstring are
                 both used, it is unspecified whether the FS assignment
                 resulting from -F sepstring is processed in command
                 line order or is processed after the last -v
                 FS=sepstring.  See the description of the FS built-in
                 variable, and how it is used, in the EXTENDED
                 DESCRIPTION section.

       -f progfile
                 Specify the pathname of the file progfile containing an
                 awk program. A pathname of '-' shall denote the
                 standard input. If multiple instances of this option
                 are specified, the concatenation of the files specified
                 as progfile in the order specified shall be the awk
                 program. The awk program can alternatively be specified
                 in the command line as a single argument.

       -v assignment
                 The application shall ensure that the assignment
                 argument is in the same form as an assignment operand.
                 The specified variable assignment shall occur prior to
                 executing the awk program, including the actions
                 associated with BEGIN patterns (if any). Multiple
                 occurrences of this option can be specified.
OPERANDS        
       The following operands shall be supported:

       program   If no -f option is specified, the first operand to awk
                 shall be the text of the awk program. The application
                 shall supply the program operand as a single argument
                 to awk.  If the text does not end in a <newline>, awk
                 shall interpret the text as if it did.

       argument  Either of the following two types of argument can be
                 intermixed:

                 file      A pathname of a file that contains the input
                           to be read, which is matched against the set
                           of patterns in the program. If no file
                           operands are specified, or if a file operand
                           is '-', the standard input shall be used.

                 assignment
                           An operand that begins with an <underscore>
                           or alphabetic character from the portable
                           character set (see the table in the Base
                           Definitions volume of POSIX.1‐2017, Section
                           6.1, Portable Character Set), followed by a
                           sequence of underscores, digits, and
                           alphabetics from the portable character set,
                           followed by the '=' character, shall specify
                           a variable assignment rather than a pathname.
                           The characters before the '=' represent the
                           name of an awk variable; if that name is an
                           awk reserved word (see Grammar) the behavior
                           is undefined. The characters following the
                           <equals-sign> shall be interpreted as if they
                           appeared in the awk program preceded and
                           followed by a double-quote ('"') character,
                           as a STRING token (see Grammar), except that
                           if the last character is an unescaped
                           <backslash>, it shall be interpreted as a
                           literal <backslash> rather than as the first
                           character of the sequence "\"".  The variable
                           shall be assigned the value of that STRING
                           token and, if appropriate, shall be
                           considered a numeric string (see Expressions
                           in awk), the variable shall also be assigned
                           its numeric value. Each such variable
                           assignment shall occur just prior to the
                           processing of the following file, if any.
                           Thus, an assignment before the first file
                           argument shall be executed after the BEGIN
                           actions (if any), while an assignment after
                           the last file argument shall occur before the
                           END actions (if any). If there are no file
                           arguments, assignments shall be executed
                           before processing the standard input.
STDIN        
       The standard input shall be used only if no file operands are
       specified, or if a file operand is '-', or if a progfile option-
       argument is '-'; see the INPUT FILES section. If the awk program
       contains no actions and no patterns, but is otherwise a valid awk
       program, standard input and any file operands shall not be read
       and awk shall exit with a return status of zero.
INPUT FILES        
       Input files to the awk program from any of the following sources
       shall be text files:

        *  Any file operands or their equivalents, achieved by modifying
           the awk variables ARGV and ARGC

        *  Standard input in the absence of any file operands

        *  Arguments to the getline function

       Whether the variable RS is set to a value other than a <newline>
       or not, for these files, implementations shall support records
       terminated with the specified separator up to {LINE_MAX} bytes
       and may support longer records.

       If -f progfile is specified, the application shall ensure that
       the files named by each of the progfile option-arguments are text
       files and their concatenation, in the same order as they appear
       in the arguments, is an awk program.
ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES        
       The following environment variables shall affect the execution of
       awk:

       LANG      Provide a default value for the internationalization
                 variables that are unset or null. (See the Base
                 Definitions volume of POSIX.1‐2017, Section 8.2,
                 Internationalization Variables for the precedence of
                 internationalization variables used to determine the
                 values of locale categories.)

       LC_ALL    If set to a non-empty string value, override the values
                 of all the other internationalization variables.

       LC_COLLATE
                 Determine the locale for the behavior of ranges,
                 equivalence classes, and multi-character collating
                 elements within regular expressions and in comparisons
                 of string values.

       LC_CTYPE  Determine the locale for the interpretation of
                 sequences of bytes of text data as characters (for
                 example, single-byte as opposed to multi-byte
                 characters in arguments and input files), the behavior
                 of character classes within regular expressions, the
                 identification of characters as letters, and the
                 mapping of uppercase and lowercase characters for the
                 toupper and tolower functions.

       LC_MESSAGES
                 Determine the locale that should be used to affect the
                 format and contents of diagnostic messages written to
                 standard error.

       LC_NUMERIC
                 Determine the radix character used when interpreting
                 numeric input, performing conversions between numeric
                 and string values, and formatting numeric output.
                 Regardless of locale, the <period> character (the
                 decimal-point character of the POSIX locale) is the
                 decimal-point character recognized in processing awk
                 programs (including assignments in command line
                 arguments).

       NLSPATH   Determine the location of message catalogs for the
                 processing of LC_MESSAGES.

       PATH      Determine the search path when looking for commands
                 executed by system(expr), or input and output pipes;
                 see the Base Definitions volume of POSIX.1‐2017,
                 Chapter 8, Environment Variables.

       In addition, all environment variables shall be visible via the
       awk variable ENVIRON.
ASYNCHRONOUS EVENTS        
       Default.
STDOUT        
       The nature of the output files depends on the awk program.
STDERR        
       The standard error shall be used only for diagnostic messages.
OUTPUT FILES        
       The nature of the output files depends on the awk program.

