COL(1)                                                                                           User Commands                                                                                           COL(1)

NAME
       col - filter reverse line feeds from input

SYNOPSIS
       col options

DESCRIPTION
       col filters out reverse (and half-reverse) line feeds so the output is in the correct order, with only forward and half-forward line feeds. It also replaces any whitespace characters with tabs where
       possible. This can be useful in processing the output of nroff(1) and tbl(1).

       col reads from standard input and writes to standard output.

OPTIONS
       -b, --no-backspaces
           Do not output any backspaces, printing only the last character written to each column position.

       -f, --fine
           Permit half-forward line feeds. Normally characters destined for a half-line boundary are printed on the following line.

       -h, --tabs
           Output tabs instead of multiple spaces.

       -l, --lines number
           Buffer at least number lines in memory. By default, 128 lines are buffered.

       -p, --pass
           Force unknown control sequences to be passed through unchanged. Normally col will filter out any control sequences other than those recognized and interpreted by itself, which are listed below.

       -x, --spaces
           Output multiple spaces instead of tabs.

       -H, --help
           Display help text and exit.

       -V, --version
           Print version and exit.

CONFORMING TO
       The col utility conforms to the Single UNIX Specification, Version 2. The -l option is an extension to the standard.

NOTES
       The control sequences for carriage motion that col understands and their decimal values are listed in the following table:

       ESC-7
           reverse line feed (escape then 7)

       ESC-8
           half reverse line feed (escape then 8)

       ESC-9
           half forward line feed (escape then 9)

       backspace
           moves back one column (8); ignored in the first column

       newline
           forward line feed (10); also does carriage return

       carriage return
           (13)

       shift in
           shift to normal character set (15)

       shift out
           shift to alternate character set (14)

       space
           moves forward one column (32)

       tab
           moves forward to next tab stop (9)

       vertical tab
           reverse line feed (11)

       All unrecognized control characters and escape sequences are discarded.

       col keeps track of the character set as characters are read and makes sure the character set is correct when they are output.

       If the input attempts to back up to the last flushed line, col will display a warning message.

HISTORY
       A col command appeared in Version 6 AT&T UNIX.

SEE ALSO
       expand(1), nroff(1), tbl(1)

REPORTING BUGS
       For bug reports, use the issue tracker at https://github.com/util-linux/util-linux/issues.

AVAILABILITY
       The col command is part of the util-linux package which can be downloaded from Linux Kernel Archive <https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util-linux/>.

util-linux 2.39.3                                                                                  2023-11-30                                                                                            COL(1)
