
GREP(1)                                                                                                                                                  User Commands                                                                                                                                                  GREP(1)

NAME
       grep - print lines that match patterns

SYNOPSIS
       grep [OPTION...] PATTERNS [FILE...]
       grep [OPTION...] -e PATTERNS ... [FILE...]
       grep [OPTION...] -f PATTERN_FILE ... [FILE...]

DESCRIPTION
       grep searches for PATTERNS in each FILE.  PATTERNS is one or more patterns separated by newline characters, and grep prints each line that matches a pattern.  Typically PATTERNS should be quoted when grep is used in a shell command.

       A FILE of “-” stands for standard input.  If no FILE is given, recursive searches examine the working directory, and nonrecursive searches read standard input.

OPTIONS
   Generic Program Information
       --help Output a usage message and exit.

       -V, --version
              Output the version number of grep and exit.

   Pattern Syntax
       -E, --extended-regexp
              Interpret PATTERNS as extended regular expressions (EREs, see below).

       -F, --fixed-strings
              Interpret PATTERNS as fixed strings, not regular expressions.

       -G, --basic-regexp
              Interpret PATTERNS as basic regular expressions (BREs, see below).  This is the default.

       -P, --perl-regexp
              Interpret PATTERNS as Perl-compatible regular expressions (PCREs).  This option is experimental when combined with the -z (--null-data) option, and grep -P may warn of unimplemented features.

   Matching Control
       -e PATTERNS, --regexp=PATTERNS
              Use PATTERNS as the patterns.  If this option is used multiple times or is combined with the -f (--file) option, search for all patterns given.  This option can be used to protect a pattern beginning with “-”.

       -f FILE, --file=FILE
              Obtain patterns from FILE, one per line.  If this option is used multiple times or is combined with the -e (--regexp) option, search for all patterns given.  The empty file contains zero patterns, and therefore matches nothing.  If FILE is - , read patterns from standard input.

       -i, --ignore-case
              Ignore case distinctions in patterns and input data, so that characters that differ only in case match each other.

       --no-ignore-case
              Do not ignore case distinctions in patterns and input data.  This is the default.  This option is useful for passing to shell scripts that already use -i, to cancel its effects because the two options override each other.

       -v, --invert-match
              Invert the sense of matching, to select non-matching lines.

       -w, --word-regexp
              Select  only  those  lines containing matches that form whole words.  The test is that the matching substring must either be at the beginning of the line, or preceded by a non-word constituent character.  Similarly, it must be either at the end of the line or followed by a non-word constituent character.
              Word-constituent characters are letters, digits, and the underscore.  This option has no effect if -x is also specified.

       -x, --line-regexp
              Select only those matches that exactly match the whole line.  For a regular expression pattern, this is like parenthesizing the pattern and then surrounding it with ^ and $.

   General Output Control
       -c, --count
              Suppress normal output; instead print a count of matching lines for each input file.  With the -v, --invert-match option (see above), count non-matching lines.

       --color[=WHEN], --colour[=WHEN]
              Surround the matched (non-empty) strings, matching lines, context lines, file names, line numbers, byte offsets, and separators (for fields and groups of context lines) with escape sequences to display them in color on the terminal.  The colors are defined by the environment variable  GREP_COLORS.   WHEN
              is never, always, or auto.

       -L, --files-without-match
              Suppress normal output; instead print the name of each input file from which no output would normally have been printed.

       -l, --files-with-matches
              Suppress normal output; instead print the name of each input file from which output would normally have been printed.  Scanning each input file stops upon first match.

       -m NUM, --max-count=NUM
              Stop  reading  a  file  after  NUM  matching  lines.  If NUM is zero, grep stops right away without reading input.  A NUM of -1 is treated as infinity and grep does not stop; this is the default.  If the input is standard input from a regular file, and NUM matching lines are output, grep ensures that the
              standard input is positioned to just after the last matching line before exiting, regardless of the presence of trailing context lines.  This enables a calling process to resume a search.  When grep stops after NUM matching lines, it outputs any trailing context lines.  When the -c or --count  option  is
              also used, grep does not output a count greater than NUM.  When the -v or --invert-match option is also used, grep stops after outputting NUM non-matching lines.

       -o, --only-matching
              Print only the matched (non-empty) parts of a matching line, with each such part on a separate output line.

       -q, --quiet, --silent
              Quiet; do not write anything to standard output.  Exit immediately with zero status if any match is found, even if an error was detected.  Also see the -s or --no-messages option.

       -s, --no-messages
              Suppress error messages about nonexistent or unreadable files.

   Output Line Prefix Control
       -b, --byte-offset
              Print the 0-based byte offset within the input file before each line of output.  If -o (--only-matching) is specified, print the offset of the matching part itself.

       -H, --with-filename
              Print the file name for each match.  This is the default when there is more than one file to search.  This is a GNU extension.

       -h, --no-filename
              Suppress the prefixing of file names on output.  This is the default when there is only one file (or only standard input) to search.

       --label=LABEL
              Display input actually coming from standard input as input coming from file LABEL.  This can be useful for commands that transform a file's contents before searching, e.g., gzip -cd foo.gz | grep --label=foo -H 'some pattern'.  See also the -H option.

       -n, --line-number
              Prefix each line of output with the 1-based line number within its input file.

       -T, --initial-tab
              Make  sure  that  the first character of actual line content lies on a tab stop, so that the alignment of tabs looks normal.  This is useful with options that prefix their output to the actual content: -H,-n, and -b.  In order to improve the probability that lines from a single file will all start at the
              same column, this also causes the line number and byte offset (if present) to be printed in a minimum size field width.

       -Z, --null
              Output a zero byte (the ASCII NUL character) instead of the character that normally follows a file name.  For example, grep -lZ outputs a zero byte after each file name instead of the usual newline.  This option makes the output  unambiguous,  even  in  the  presence  of  file  names  containing  unusual
              characters like newlines.  This option can be used with commands like find -print0, perl -0, sort -z, and xargs -0 to process arbitrary file names, even those that contain newline characters.

   Context Line Control
       -A NUM, --after-context=NUM
              Print NUM lines of trailing context after matching lines.  Places a line containing a group separator (--) between contiguous groups of matches.  With the -o or --only-matching option, this has no effect and a warning is given.

       -B NUM, --before-context=NUM
              Print NUM lines of leading context before matching lines.  Places a line containing a group separator (--) between contiguous groups of matches.  With the -o or --only-matching option, this has no effect and a warning is given.

       -C NUM, -NUM, --context=NUM
              Print NUM lines of output context.  Places a line containing a group separator (--) between contiguous groups of matches.  With the -o or --only-matching option, this has no effect and a warning is given.

       --group-separator=SEP
              When -A, -B, or -C are in use, print SEP instead of -- between groups of lines.

       --no-group-separator
              When -A, -B, or -C are in use, do not print a separator between groups of lines.

   File and Directory Selection
       -a, --text
              Process a binary file as if it were text; this is equivalent to the --binary-files=text option.

       --binary-files=TYPE
              If a file's data or metadata indicate that the file contains binary data, assume that the file is of type TYPE.  Non-text bytes indicate binary data; these are either output bytes that are improperly encoded for the current locale, or null input bytes when the -z option is not given.

              By default, TYPE is binary, and grep suppresses output after null input binary data is discovered, and suppresses output lines that contain improperly encoded data.  When some output is suppressed, grep follows any output with a message to standard error saying that a binary file matches.

              If TYPE is without-match, when grep discovers null input binary data it assumes that the rest of the file does not match; this is equivalent to the -I option.

              If TYPE is text, grep processes a binary file as if it were text; this is equivalent to the -a option.

              When  type  is binary, grep may treat non-text bytes as line terminators even without the -z option.  This means choosing binary versus text can affect whether a pattern matches a file.  For example, when type is binary the pattern q$ might match q immediately followed by a null byte, even though this is
              not matched when type is text.  Conversely, when type is binary the pattern . (period) might not match a null byte.

              Warning: The -a option might output binary garbage, which can have nasty side effects if the output is a terminal and if the terminal driver interprets some of it as commands.  On the other hand, when reading files whose text encodings are unknown, it can be helpful to use -a or to set LC_ALL='C' in  the
              environment, in order to find more matches even if the matches are unsafe for direct display.

       -D ACTION, --devices=ACTION
              If an input file is a device, FIFO or socket, use ACTION to process it.  By default, ACTION is read, which means that devices are read just as if they were ordinary files.  If ACTION is skip, devices are silently skipped.

       -d ACTION, --directories=ACTION
              If an input file is a directory, use ACTION to process it.  By default, ACTION is read, i.e., read directories just as if they were ordinary files.  If ACTION is skip, silently skip directories.  If ACTION is recurse, read all files under each directory, recursively, following symbolic links only if they
              are on the command line.  This is equivalent to the -r option.

       --exclude=GLOB
              Skip  any command-line file with a name suffix that matches the pattern GLOB, using wildcard matching; a name suffix is either the whole name, or a trailing part that starts with a non-slash character immediately after a slash (/) in the name.  When searching recursively, skip any subfile whose base name
              matches GLOB; the base name is the part after the last slash.  A pattern can use *, ?, and [...] as wildcards, and \ to quote a wildcard or backslash character literally.

       --exclude-from=FILE
              Skip files whose base name matches any of the file-name globs read from FILE (using wildcard matching as described under --exclude).

       --exclude-dir=GLOB
              Skip any command-line directory with a name suffix that matches the pattern GLOB.  When searching recursively, skip any subdirectory whose base name matches GLOB.  Ignore any redundant trailing slashes in GLOB.

       -I     Process a binary file as if it did not contain matching data; this is equivalent to the --binary-files=without-match option.

       --include=GLOB
              Search only files whose base name matches GLOB (using wildcard matching as described under --exclude).  If contradictory --include and --exclude options are given, the last matching one wins.  If no --include or --exclude options match, a file is included unless the first such option is --include.

       -r, --recursive
              Read all files under each directory, recursively, following symbolic links only if they are on the command line.  Note that if no file operand is given, grep searches the working directory.  This is equivalent to the -d recurse option.

       -R, --dereference-recursive
              Read all files under each directory, recursively.  Follow all symbolic links, unlike -r.

   Other Options
       --line-buffered
              Use line buffering on output.  This can cause a performance penalty.

       -U, --binary
              Treat the file(s) as binary.  By default, under MS-DOS and MS-Windows, grep guesses whether a file is text or binary as described for the --binary-files option.  If grep decides the file is a text file, it strips the CR characters from the original file contents (to make regular expressions with ^ and  $
              work  correctly).   Specifying -U overrules this guesswork, causing all files to be read and passed to the matching mechanism verbatim; if the file is a text file with CR/LF pairs at the end of each line, this will cause some regular expressions to fail.  This option has no effect on platforms other than
              MS-DOS and MS-Windows.

       -z, --null-data
              Treat input and output data as sequences of lines, each terminated by a zero byte (the ASCII NUL character) instead of a newline.  Like the -Z or --null option, this option can be used with commands like sort -z to process arbitrary file names.

REGULAR EXPRESSIONS
       A regular expression is a pattern that describes a set of strings.  Regular expressions are constructed analogously to arithmetic expressions, by using various operators to combine smaller expressions.

       grep understands three different versions of regular expression syntax: “basic” (BRE), “extended” (ERE) and “perl” (PCRE).  In GNU grep, basic and extended regular expressions are merely different notations for the same pattern-matching functionality.  In other implementations,  basic  regular  expressions  are
       ordinarily  less  powerful than extended, though occasionally it is the other way around.  The following description applies to extended regular expressions; differences for basic regular expressions are summarized afterwards.  Perl-compatible regular expressions have different functionality, and are documented
       in pcre2syntax(3) and pcre2pattern(3), but work only if PCRE support is enabled.

       The fundamental building blocks are the regular expressions that match a single character.  Most characters, including all letters and digits, are regular expressions that match themselves.  Any meta-character with special meaning may be quoted by preceding it with a backslash.

       The period . matches any single character.  It is unspecified whether it matches an encoding error.

   Character Classes and Bracket Expressions
       A bracket expression is a list of characters enclosed by [ and ].  It matches any single character in that list.  If the first character of the list is the caret ^ then it matches any character not in the list; it is unspecified whether it  matches  an  encoding  error.   For  example,  the  regular  expression
       [0123456789] matches any single digit.

       Within  a  bracket  expression,  a  range expression consists of two characters separated by a hyphen.  It matches any single character that sorts between the two characters, inclusive, using the locale's collating sequence and character set.  For example, in the default C locale, [a-d] is equivalent to [abcd].
       Many locales sort characters in dictionary order, and in these locales [a-d] is typically not equivalent to [abcd]; it might be equivalent to [aBbCcDd], for example.  To obtain the traditional interpretation of bracket expressions, you can use the C locale by setting the LC_ALL environment variable to the value
       C.

       Finally, certain named classes of characters are predefined within bracket expressions, as follows.  Their names are self explanatory, and they are [:alnum:], [:alpha:], [:blank:], [:cntrl:], [:digit:], [:graph:], [:lower:], [:print:], [:punct:], [:space:], [:upper:], and [:xdigit:].  For  example,  [[:alnum:]]
       means  the  character  class  of  numbers  and  letters in the current locale.  In the C locale and ASCII character set encoding, this is the same as [0-9A-Za-z].  (Note that the brackets in these class names are part of the symbolic names, and must be included in addition to the brackets delimiting the bracket
       expression.)  Most meta-characters lose their special meaning inside bracket expressions.  To include a literal ] place it first in the list.  Similarly, to include a literal ^ place it anywhere but first.  Finally, to include a literal - place it last.

   Anchoring
       The caret ^ and the dollar sign $ are meta-characters that respectively match the empty string at the beginning and end of a line.

   The Backslash Character and Special Expressions
       The symbols \< and \> respectively match the empty string at the beginning and end of a word.  The symbol \b matches the empty string at the edge of a word, and \B matches the empty string provided it's not at the edge of a word.   The  symbol  \w  is  a  synonym  for  [_[:alnum:]]  and  \W  is  a  synonym  for
       [^_[:alnum:]].

   Repetition
       A regular expression may be followed by one of several repetition operators:
       ?      The preceding item is optional and matched at most once.
       *      The preceding item will be matched zero or more times.
       +      The preceding item will be matched one or more times.
       {n}    The preceding item is matched exactly n times.
       {n,}   The preceding item is matched n or more times.
       {,m}   The preceding item is matched at most m times.  This is a GNU extension.
       {n,m}  The preceding item is matched at least n times, but not more than m times.

   Concatenation
       Two regular expressions may be concatenated; the resulting regular expression matches any string formed by concatenating two substrings that respectively match the concatenated expressions.

   Alternation
       Two regular expressions may be joined by the infix operator |; the resulting regular expression matches any string matching either alternate expression.

   Precedence
       Repetition takes precedence over concatenation, which in turn takes precedence over alternation.  A whole expression may be enclosed in parentheses to override these precedence rules and form a subexpression.

   Back-references and Subexpressions
       The back-reference \n, where n is a single digit, matches the substring previously matched by the nth parenthesized subexpression of the regular expression.

   Basic vs Extended Regular Expressions
       In basic regular expressions the meta-characters ?, +, {, |, (, and ) lose their special meaning; instead use the backslashed versions \?, \+, \{, \|, \(, and \).

EXIT STATUS
       Normally the exit status is 0 if a line is selected, 1 if no lines were selected, and 2 if an error occurred.  However, if the -q or --quiet or --silent is used and a line is selected, the exit status is 0 even if an error occurred.

ENVIRONMENT
       The behavior of grep is affected by the following environment variables.

       The  locale for category LC_foo is specified by examining the three environment variables LC_ALL, LC_foo, LANG, in that order.  The first of these variables that is set specifies the locale.  For example, if LC_ALL is not set, but LC_MESSAGES is set to pt_BR, then the Brazilian Portuguese locale is used for the
       LC_MESSAGES category.  The C locale is used if none of these environment variables are set, if the locale catalog is not installed, or if grep was not compiled with national language support (NLS).  The shell command locale -a lists locales that are currently available.

       GREP_COLORS
              Controls how the --color option highlights output.  Its value is a colon-separated list of capabilities that defaults to ms=01;31:mc=01;31:sl=:cx=:fn=35:ln=32:bn=32:se=36 with the rv and ne boolean capabilities omitted (i.e., false).  Supported capabilities are as follows.

              sl=    SGR substring for whole selected lines (i.e., matching lines when the -v command-line option is omitted, or non-matching lines when -v is specified).  If however the boolean rv capability and the -v command-line option are both specified, it applies to context matching lines instead.  The  default
                     is empty (i.e., the terminal's default color pair).

              cx=    SGR  substring  for  whole  context  lines (i.e., non-matching lines when the -v command-line option is omitted, or matching lines when -v is specified).  If however the boolean rv capability and the -v command-line option are both specified, it applies to selected non-matching lines instead.  The
                     default is empty (i.e., the terminal's default color pair).

              rv     Boolean value that reverses (swaps) the meanings of the sl= and cx= capabilities when the -v command-line option is specified.  The default is false (i.e., the capability is omitted).

              mt=01;31
                     SGR substring for matching non-empty text in any matching line (i.e., a selected line when the -v command-line option is omitted, or a context line when -v is specified).  Setting this is equivalent to setting both ms= and mc= at once to the same value.  The default is a bold red  text  foreground
                     over the current line background.

              ms=01;31
                     SGR substring for matching non-empty text in a selected line.  (This is only used when the -v command-line option is omitted.)  The effect of the sl= (or cx= if rv) capability remains active when this kicks in.  The default is a bold red text foreground over the current line background.

              mc=01;31
                     SGR substring for matching non-empty text in a context line.  (This is only used when the -v command-line option is specified.)  The effect of the cx= (or sl= if rv) capability remains active when this kicks in.  The default is a bold red text foreground over the current line background.

              fn=35  SGR substring for file names prefixing any content line.  The default is a magenta text foreground over the terminal's default background.

              ln=32  SGR substring for line numbers prefixing any content line.  The default is a green text foreground over the terminal's default background.

              bn=32  SGR substring for byte offsets prefixing any content line.  The default is a green text foreground over the terminal's default background.

              se=36  SGR substring for separators that are inserted between selected line fields (:), between context line fields, (-), and between groups of adjacent lines when nonzero context is specified (--).  The default is a cyan text foreground over the terminal's default background.

              ne     Boolean  value  that prevents clearing to the end of line using Erase in Line (EL) to Right (\33[K) each time a colorized item ends.  This is needed on terminals on which EL is not supported.  It is otherwise useful on terminals for which the back_color_erase (bce) boolean terminfo capability does
                     not apply, when the chosen highlight colors do not affect the background, or when EL is too slow or causes too much flicker.  The default is false (i.e., the capability is omitted).

              Note that boolean capabilities have no =... part.  They are omitted (i.e., false) by default and become true when specified.

              See the Select Graphic Rendition (SGR) section in the documentation of the text terminal that is used for permitted values and their meaning as character attributes.  These substring values are integers in decimal representation and can be concatenated with semicolons.  grep takes care of assembling  the
              result into a complete SGR sequence (\33[...m).  Common values to concatenate include 1 for bold, 4 for underline, 5 for blink, 7 for inverse, 39 for default foreground color, 30 to 37 for foreground colors, 90 to 97 for 16-color mode foreground colors, 38;5;0 to 38;5;255 for 88-color and 256-color modes
              foreground colors, 49 for default background color, 40 to 47 for background colors, 100 to 107 for 16-color mode background colors, and 48;5;0 to 48;5;255 for 88-color and 256-color modes background colors.

       LC_ALL, LC_COLLATE, LANG
              These variables specify the locale for the LC_COLLATE category, which determines the collating sequence used to interpret range expressions like [a-z].

       LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LANG
              These  variables  specify  the  locale for the LC_CTYPE category, which determines the type of characters, e.g., which characters are whitespace.  This category also determines the character encoding, that is, whether text is encoded in UTF-8, ASCII, or some other encoding.  In the C or POSIX locale, all
              characters are encoded as a single byte and every byte is a valid character.

       LC_ALL, LC_MESSAGES, LANG
              These variables specify the locale for the LC_MESSAGES category, which determines the language that grep uses for messages.  The default C locale uses American English messages.

       POSIXLY_CORRECT
              If set, grep behaves as POSIX requires; otherwise, grep behaves more like other GNU programs.  POSIX requires that options that follow file names must be treated as file names; by default, such options are permuted to the front of the operand list and are treated as options.  Also,  POSIX  requires  that
              unrecognized options be diagnosed as “illegal”, but since they are not really against the law the default is to diagnose them as “invalid”.

NOTES
       This man page is maintained only fitfully; the full documentation is often more up-to-date.

COPYRIGHT
       Copyright 1998-2000, 2002, 2005-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

       This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

BUGS
   Reporting Bugs
       Email bug reports to the bug-reporting address ⟨bug-grep@gnu.org⟩.  An email archive ⟨https://lists.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/bug-grep⟩ and a bug tracker ⟨https://debbugs.gnu.org/cgi/pkgreport.cgi?package=grep⟩ are available.

   Known Bugs
       Large repetition counts in the {n,m} construct may cause grep to use lots of memory.  In addition, certain other obscure regular expressions require exponential time and space, and may cause grep to run out of memory.

       Back-references are very slow, and may require exponential time.

EXAMPLE
       The following example outputs the location and contents of any line containing “f” and ending in “.c”, within all files in the current directory whose names contain “g” and end in “.h”.  The -n option outputs line numbers, the -- argument treats expansions of “*g*.h” starting with “-” as file names not options,
       and the empty file /dev/null causes file names to be output even if only one file name happens to be of the form “*g*.h”.

         $ grep -n -- 'f.*\.c$' *g*.h /dev/null
         argmatch.h:1:/* definitions and prototypes for argmatch.c

       The only line that matches is line 1 of argmatch.h.  Note that the regular expression syntax used in the pattern differs from the globbing syntax that the shell uses to match file names.

SEE ALSO
   Regular Manual Pages
       awk(1), cmp(1), diff(1), find(1), perl(1), sed(1), sort(1), xargs(1), read(2), pcre2(3), pcre2syntax(3), pcre2pattern(3), terminfo(5), glob(7), regex(7)

   Full Documentation
       A complete manual ⟨https://www.gnu.org/software/grep/manual/⟩ is available.  If the info and grep programs are properly installed at your site, the command

              info grep

       should give you access to the complete manual.

GNU grep 3.11                                                                                                                                              2019-12-29                                                                                                                                                   GREP(1)
