CAT(1)			    General Commands Manual			CAT(1)

NAME
       cat -- concatenate and print files

SYNOPSIS
       cat [-belnstuv] [file ...]

DESCRIPTION
       The  cat	utility	reads files sequentially, writing them to the standard
       output.	The file operands are processed	 in  command-line  order.   If
       file  is	a single dash (`-') or absent, cat reads from the standard in-
       put.  If	file is	a Unix domain socket, cat  connects  to	 it  and  then
       reads  it until EOF.  This complements the Unix domain binding capabil-
       ity available in	inetd(8).

       The options are as follows:

       -b      Number the non-blank output lines, starting at 1.

       -e      Display non-printing characters (see the	-v option),  and  dis-
	       play a dollar sign (`$')	at the end of each line.

       -l      Set  an exclusive advisory lock on the standard output file de-
	       scriptor.  This lock is set using fcntl(2)  with	 the  F_SETLKW
	       command.	  If the output	file is	already	locked,	cat will block
	       until the lock is acquired.

       -n      Number the output lines,	starting at 1.

       -s      Squeeze multiple	adjacent empty lines, causing the output to be
	       single spaced.

       -t      Display non-printing characters (see the	-v option),  and  dis-
	       play tab	characters as `^I'.

       -u      Disable output buffering.

       -v      Display	non-printing  characters so they are visible.  Control
	       characters print	as `^X'	for control-X;	the  delete  character
	       (octal  0177)  prints  as `^?'.	Non-ASCII characters (with the
	       high bit	set) are printed as `M-' (for meta)  followed  by  the
	       character for the low 7 bits.

EXIT STATUS
       The cat utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an	error occurs.

EXAMPLES
       The command:

	     cat file1

       will print the contents of file1	to the standard	output.

       The command:

	     cat file1 file2 > file3

       will  sequentially  print  the  contents	of file1 and file2 to the file
       file3, truncating file3 if it already exists.  See the manual page  for
       your shell (e.g., sh(1))	for more information on	redirection.

       The command:

	     cat file1 - file2 - file3

       will print the contents of file1, print data it receives	from the stan-
       dard  input  until  it receives an EOF (`^D') character,	print the con-
       tents of	file2, read and	output contents	of the standard	 input	again,
       then  finally  output the contents of file3.  Note that if the standard
       input refers to a file, the second dash on the command-line would  have
       no  effect,  since  the	entire contents	of the file would have already
       been read and printed by	cat when it encountered	the first `-' operand.

SEE ALSO
       head(1),	more(1), pr(1),	sh(1),	tail(1),  vis(1),  zcat(1),  fcntl(2),
       setbuf(3)

       Rob  Pike,  "UNIX  Style,  or cat -v Considered Harmful", USENIX	Summer
       Conference Proceedings, 1983.

STANDARDS
       The cat utility is compliant with the IEEE Std 1003.2-1992  ("POSIX.2")
       specification.

       The flags [-belnstv] are	extensions to the specification.

HISTORY
       A cat utility appeared in Version 1 AT&T	UNIX.  Dennis Ritchie designed
       and wrote the first man page.  It appears to have been for cat.

BUGS
       Because of the shell language mechanism used to perform output redirec-
       tion,  the  command  "cat  file1	file2 >	file1" will cause the original
       data in file1 to	be destroyed!

       The cat utility does not	recognize multibyte characters when the	-t  or
       -v option is in effect.

FreeBSD	13.2		       January 29, 2013				CAT(1)
