CHGRP(1)		    General Commands Manual		      CHGRP(1)

NAME
       chgrp --	change group

SYNOPSIS
       chgrp [-fhvx] [-R [-H | -L | -P]] group file ...

DESCRIPTION
       The  chgrp  utility  sets  the  group ID	of the file named by each file
       operand to the group ID specified by the	group operand.

       The following options are available:

       -H      If the -R option	is specified, symbolic links  on  the  command
	       line  are  followed and hence unaffected	by the command.	 (Sym-
	       bolic links encountered during traversal	are not	followed.)

       -L      If the -R option	is specified, all symbolic links are followed.

       -P      If the -R option	is specified, no symbolic links	are  followed.
	       This is the default.

       -R      Change  the  group  ID  of  the	file hierarchies rooted	in the
	       files, instead of just the files	themselves.  Beware  of	 unin-
	       tentionally matching the	".." hard link to the parent directory
	       when using wildcards like ".*".

       -f      The  force  option  ignores errors, except for usage errors and
	       does not	query about strange modes (unless the  user  does  not
	       have proper permissions).

       -h      If the file is a	symbolic link, the group ID of the link	itself
	       is changed rather than the file that is pointed to.

       -v      Cause  chgrp to be verbose, showing files as the	group is modi-
	       fied.  If the -v	flag is	specified more than once,  chgrp  will
	       print  the  filename, followed by the old and new numeric group
	       ID.

       -x      File system mount points	are not	traversed.

       The -H, -L and -P options are ignored unless the	-R  option  is	speci-
       fied.  In addition, these options override each other and the command's
       actions are determined by the last one specified.

       The  group  operand can be either a group name from the group database,
       or a numeric group ID.  If a group name is also a numeric group ID, the
       operand is used as a group name.

       The user	invoking chgrp must belong to the specified group and  be  the
       owner of	the file, or be	the super-user.

       If  chgrp  receives  a  SIGINFO	signal	(see  the  status argument for
       stty(1)), then the current filename as well as the old  and  new	 group
       names are displayed.

FILES
       /etc/group  group ID file

EXIT STATUS
       The chgrp utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error	occurs.

COMPATIBILITY
       In  previous  versions  of  this	 system,  symbolic  links did not have
       groups.

       The -v and -x options are non-standard and their	use in scripts is  not
       recommended.

SEE ALSO
       chown(2), fts(3), group(5), passwd(5), symlink(7), chown(8)

STANDARDS
       The chgrp utility is expected to	be IEEE	Std 1003.2 ("POSIX.2") compat-
       ible.

FreeBSD	13.2			January	7, 2017			      CHGRP(1)
