CUT(1)			    General Commands Manual			CUT(1)

NAME
       cut -- cut out selected portions	of each	line of	a file

SYNOPSIS
       cut -b list [-n]	[file ...]
       cut -c list [file ...]
       cut -f list [-w | -d delim] [-s]	[file ...]

DESCRIPTION
       The  cut	 utility cuts out selected portions of each line (as specified
       by list)	from each file and writes them to the standard output.	If  no
       file  arguments	are  specified,	 or  a	file argument is a single dash
       (`-'), cut reads	from the standard input.  The items specified by  list
       can be in terms of column position or in	terms of fields	delimited by a
       special character.  Column and field numbering start from 1.

       The  list option	argument is a comma or whitespace separated set	of in-
       creasing	numbers	and/or number ranges.  Number ranges consist of	a num-
       ber, a dash (`-'), and a	second number and select the columns or	fields
       from the	first number to	the  second,  inclusive.   Numbers  or	number
       ranges  may  be preceded	by a dash, which selects all columns or	fields
       from 1 to the last number.  Numbers or number ranges may	be followed by
       a dash, which selects all columns or fields from	the last number	to the
       end of the line.	 Numbers and number ranges may be  repeated,  overlap-
       ping, and in any	order.	It is not an error to select columns or	fields
       not present in the input	line.

       The options are as follows:

       -b list
	       The list	specifies byte positions.

       -c list
	       The list	specifies character positions.

       -d delim
	       Use  delim  as the field	delimiter character instead of the tab
	       character.

       -f list
	       The list	specifies fields, separated in the input by the	 field
	       delimiter  character  (see  the	-d option).  Output fields are
	       separated by a single occurrence	of the field delimiter charac-
	       ter.

       -n      Do not split multi-byte characters.  Characters	will  only  be
	       output if at least one byte is selected,	and, after a prefix of
	       zero  or	more unselected	bytes, the rest	of the bytes that form
	       the character are selected.

       -s      Suppress	lines with  no	field  delimiter  characters.	Unless
	       specified,  lines with no delimiters are	passed through unmodi-
	       fied.

       -w      Use whitespace (spaces and tabs)	as the delimiter.  Consecutive
	       spaces and tabs count as	one single field separator.

ENVIRONMENT
       The LANG, LC_ALL	and LC_CTYPE environment variables affect  the	execu-
       tion of cut as described	in environ(7).

EXIT STATUS
       The cut utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an	error occurs.

EXAMPLES
       Extract users' login names and shells from the system passwd(5) file as
       "name:shell" pairs:

	     cut -d : -f 1,7 /etc/passwd

       Show the	names and login	times of the currently logged in users:

	     who | cut -c 1-16,26-38

SEE ALSO
       colrm(1), paste(1)

STANDARDS
       The cut utility conforms	to IEEE	Std 1003.2-1992	("POSIX.2").

       The -w flag is an extension to the specification.

HISTORY
       A cut command first appeared in 4.3BSD-Reno.

AUTHORS
       The  original  Bell Labs	version	was written by Gottfried W. R. Luderer
       and the BSD version by Adam S. Moskowitz.

FreeBSD	13.2		       November	6, 2022				CUT(1)
