DD(1)			    General Commands Manual			 DD(1)

NAME
       dd -- convert and copy a	file

SYNOPSIS
       dd [operands ...]

DESCRIPTION
       The dd utility copies the standard input	to the standard	output.	 Input
       data is read and	written	in 512-byte blocks.  If	input reads are	short,
       input  from  multiple  reads  are  aggregated to	form the output	block.
       When finished, dd displays the number of	complete and partial input and
       output blocks and truncated input records to the	standard error output.

       The following operands are available:

       bs=n	Set both input and output block	size to	n  bytes,  superseding
		the  ibs and obs operands.  If no conversion values other than
		noerror, notrunc or sync are specified,	then each input	 block
		is copied to the output	as a single block without any aggrega-
		tion of	short blocks.

       cbs=n	Set  the  conversion  record  size to n	bytes.	The conversion
		record size is required	by the record oriented conversion val-
		ues.

       count=n	Copy only n input blocks.

       files=n	Copy n input files before terminating.	This operand  is  only
		applicable when	the input device is a tape.

       fillchar=c
		When  padding  a  block	 in  conversion	 mode or due to	use of
		noerror	and sync modes,	fill with the specified	ASCII  charac-
		ter, rather than using a space or NUL.

       ibs=n	Set  the  input	 block	size to	n bytes	instead	of the default
		512.

       if=file	Read input from	file instead of	the standard input.

       iflag=value[,value ...]
		Where value is one of the symbols from the following list.

		fullblock  Reading from	the input file may not obtain  a  full
			   block.  When	a read returns short, continue reading
			   to fill the block.  Without this flag, count	limits
			   the	number of times	read(2)	is called on the input
			   rather than the number of blocks  copied  in	 full.
			   May not be combined with conv=sync.

		direct	   Set	the  O_DIRECT  flag  on	the input file to make
			   reads bypass	any local caching.

       iseek=n	Seek on	the input file n  blocks.   This  is  synonymous  with
		skip=n.

       obs=n	Set  the  output  block	size to	n bytes	instead	of the default
		512.

       of=file	Write output to	file instead of	the standard output.  Any reg-
		ular output file is truncated unless  the  notrunc  conversion
		value  is specified.  If an initial portion of the output file
		is seeked past (see the	oseek operand),	 the  output  file  is
		truncated at that point.

       oflag=value[,value ...]
		Where value is one of the symbols from the following list.

		fsync	Set the	O_FSYNC	flag on	the output file	to make	writes
			synchronous.

		sync	Set  the O_SYNC	flag on	the output file	to make	writes
			synchronous.  This is synonymous with the fsync	value.

		direct	Set the	O_DIRECT flag  on  the	output	file  to  make
			writes bypass any local	caching.

       oseek=n	Seek  on  the  output  file n blocks.  This is synonymous with
		seek=n.

       seek=n	Seek n blocks from the beginning of the	output before copying.
		On non-tape devices, an	lseek(2) operation  is	used.	Other-
		wise, existing blocks are read and the data discarded.	If the
		user  does  not	have read permission for the tape, it is posi-
		tioned using the tape ioctl(2) function	calls.	 If  the  seek
		operation  is past the end of file, space from the current end
		of file	to the specified offset	is filled with blocks  of  NUL
		bytes.

       skip=n	Skip  n	blocks from the	beginning of the input before copying.
		On input which supports	seeks, an lseek(2) operation is	 used.
		Otherwise,  input  data	is read	and discarded.	For pipes, the
		correct	number of bytes	is read.  For all other	 devices,  the
		correct	 number	 of  blocks is read without distinguishing be-
		tween a	partial	or complete block being	read.

       speed=n	Limit the copying speed	to n bytes per second.

       status=value
		Where value is one of the symbols from the following list.

		noxfer	  Do not print the transfer  statistics	 as  the  last
			  line of status output.

		none	  Do  not print	the status output.  Error messages are
			  shown; informational messages	are not.

		progress  Print	basic transfer statistics once per second.

       conv=value[,value ...]
		Where value is one of the symbols from the following list.

		ascii, oldascii
			 The same as the unblock value except that  characters
			 are  translated  from	EBCDIC	to  ASCII  before  the
			 records are converted.	 (These	values	imply  unblock
			 if the	operand	cbs is also specified.)	 There are two
			 conversion maps for ASCII.  The value ascii specifies
			 the  recommended  one	which  is compatible with AT&T
			 System	V UNIX.	 The value oldascii specifies the  one
			 used  in  historic AT&T UNIX and pre-4.3BSD-Reno sys-
			 tems.

		block	 Treats	the input as a sequence	of newline or  end-of-
			 file  terminated  variable length records independent
			 of input and output block boundaries.	 Any  trailing
			 newline character is discarded.  Each input record is
			 converted  to	a fixed	length output record where the
			 length	 is  specified	by  the	 cbs  operand.	 Input
			 records  shorter  than	the conversion record size are
			 padded	with spaces.  Input records  longer  than  the
			 conversion  record size are truncated.	 The number of
			 truncated input records, if any, are reported to  the
			 standard error	output at the completion of the	copy.

		ebcdic,	ibm, oldebcdic,	oldibm
			 The  same  as	the block value	except that characters
			 are translated	from ASCII to EBCDIC after the records
			 are converted.	 (These	 values	 imply	block  if  the
			 operand  cbs is also specified.)  There are four con-
			 version maps for EBCDIC.  The value ebcdic  specifies
			 the  recommended  one	which  is compatible with AT&T
			 System	V UNIX.	 The value ibm is a slightly different
			 mapping, which	is compatible with the AT&T  System  V
			 UNIX  ibm value.  The values oldebcdic	and oldibm are
			 maps used in historic AT&T UNIX  and  pre-4.3BSD-Reno
			 systems.

		fdatasync
			 Perform  an  fdatasync(2)  on	the output file	before
			 closing it.

		fsync	 Perform an fsync(2) on	the output file	before closing
			 it.

		lcase	 Transform uppercase characters	into lowercase charac-
			 ters.

		pareven, parnone, parodd, parset
			 Output	data with the specified	 parity.   The	parity
			 bit  on input is stripped unless EBCDIC to ASCII con-
			 versions is also specified.

		noerror	 Do not	stop processing	on an input  error.   When  an
			 input	error occurs, a	diagnostic message followed by
			 the current input and output  block  counts  will  be
			 written to the	standard error output in the same for-
			 mat  as the standard completion message.  If the sync
			 conversion is also specified, any missing input  data
			 will  be replaced with	NUL bytes (or with spaces if a
			 block oriented	conversion value  was  specified)  and
			 processed  as a normal	input buffer.  If the fillchar
			 option	is specified, the fill character  provided  on
			 the  command  line will override the automatic	selec-
			 tion of the fill character.  If the  sync  conversion
			 is not	specified, the input block is omitted from the
			 output.  On input files which are not tapes or	pipes,
			 the  file offset will be positioned past the block in
			 which the error occurred using	lseek(2).

		notrunc	 Do not	truncate the output file.  This	will  preserve
			 any  blocks in	the output file	not explicitly written
			 by dd.	 The notrunc value is not supported for	tapes.

		osync	 Pad the final output block to the full	 output	 block
			 size.	 If  the  input	 file is not a multiple	of the
			 output	block size after conversion,  this  conversion
			 forces	 the final output block	to be the same size as
			 preceding blocks for use on devices that require reg-
			 ularly	sized blocks to	be written.   This  option  is
			 incompatible with use of the bs=n block size specifi-
			 cation.

		sparse	 If  one or more output	blocks would consist solely of
			 NUL bytes, try	to seek	the output  file  by  the  re-
			 quired	 space	instead	of filling them	with NULs, re-
			 sulting in a sparse file.

		swab	 Swap every pair of input bytes.  If an	 input	buffer
			 has an	odd number of bytes, the last byte will	be ig-
			 nored during swapping.

		sync	 Pad  every  input  block  to  the  input buffer size.
			 Spaces	are used for pad bytes	if  a  block  oriented
			 conversion  value  is	specified, otherwise NUL bytes
			 are used.

		ucase	 Transform lowercase characters	into uppercase charac-
			 ters.

		unblock	 Treats	the  input  as	a  sequence  of	 fixed	length
			 records  independent of input and output block	bound-
			 aries.	 The length of the input records is  specified
			 by  the  cbs  operand.	 Any trailing space characters
			 are discarded and a newline character is appended.

       Where sizes or speed are	specified, a decimal,  octal,  or  hexadecimal
       number  of bytes	is expected.  If the number ends with a	"b", "k", "m",
       "g", "t", "p", or "w", the number is  multiplied	 by  512,  1024	 (1K),
       1048576	(1M),  1073741824  (1G),  1099511627776	(1T), 1125899906842624
       (1P) or the number of bytes in an integer, respectively.	 Two  or  more
       numbers may be separated	by an "x" to indicate a	product.

       When finished, dd displays the number of	complete and partial input and
       output  blocks,	truncated  input  records and odd-length byte-swapping
       blocks to the standard error output.  A	partial	 input	block  is  one
       where  less than	the input block	size was read.	A partial output block
       is one where less than the output block size was	written.  Partial out-
       put blocks to tape devices are considered fatal errors.	Otherwise, the
       rest of the block will be written.  Partial output blocks to  character
       devices will produce a warning message.	A truncated input block	is one
       where  a	variable length	record oriented	conversion value was specified
       and the input line was too long to fit in the conversion	record or  was
       not newline terminated.

       Normally,  data	resulting  from	input or conversion or both are	aggre-
       gated into output blocks	of the specified size.	After the end of input
       is reached, any remaining output	is written as  a  block.   This	 means
       that the	final output block may be shorter than the output block	size.

       If  dd receives a SIGINFO (see the status argument for stty(1)) signal,
       the current input and output block counts will be written to the	 stan-
       dard  error  output  in the same	format as the standard completion mes-
       sage.  If dd receives a SIGINT signal, the  current  input  and	output
       block  counts  will be written to the standard error output in the same
       format as the standard completion message and dd	will exit.

EXIT STATUS
       The dd utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error occurs.

EXAMPLES
       Check that a disk drive contains	no bad blocks:

	     dd	if=/dev/ada0 of=/dev/null bs=1m

       Do a refresh of a disk drive, in	order to prevent presently recoverable
       read errors from	progressing into unrecoverable read errors:

	     dd	if=/dev/ada0 of=/dev/ada0 bs=1m

       Remove parity bit from a	file:

	     dd	if=file	conv=parnone of=file.txt

       Check for (even)	parity errors on a file:

	     dd	if=file	conv=pareven | cmp -x -	file

       To create an image of a Mode-1 CD-ROM, which is a commonly used	format
       for data	CD-ROM disks, use a block size of 2048 bytes:

	     dd	if=/dev/cd0 of=filename.iso bs=2048

       Write a filesystem image	to a memory stick, padding the end with	zeros,
       if necessary, to	a 1MiB boundary:

	     dd	if=memstick.img	of=/dev/da0 bs=1m conv=noerror,sync

SEE ALSO
       cp(1), mt(1), recoverdisk(1), tr(1), geom(4), trim(8)

STANDARDS
       The  dd	utility	 is  expected  to be a superset	of the IEEE Std	1003.2
       ("POSIX.2") standard.  The files	and status  operands  and  the	ascii,
       ebcdic,	ibm,  oldascii,	 oldebcdic and oldibm values are extensions to
       the POSIX standard.

HISTORY
       A dd command appeared in	Version	5 AT&T UNIX.

BUGS
       Protection mechanisms in	the geom(4) subsystem might prevent the	super-
       user from writing blocks	to a disk.  Instructions for temporarily  dis-
       abling  these  protection  mechanisms  can  be found in the geom(4) man
       page.

FreeBSD	13.2			 June 4, 2020				 DD(1)
