DU(1)			    General Commands Manual			 DU(1)

NAME
       du -- display disk usage	statistics

SYNOPSIS
       du   [--libxo]  [-Aclnx]	 [-H  |	 -L  |	-P]  [-g  |  -h	 |  -k	|  -m]
	  [-a |	-s |  -d  depth]  [-B  blocksize]  [-I	mask]  [-t  threshold]
	  [file	...]

DESCRIPTION
       The du utility displays the file	system block usage for each file argu-
       ment and	for each directory in the file hierarchy rooted	in each	direc-
       tory argument.  If no file is specified,	the block usage	of the hierar-
       chy rooted in the current directory is displayed.

       The options are as follows:

       --libxo
	       Generate	 output	via libxo(3) in	a selection of different human
	       and machine readable formats.  See xo_parse_args(3) for details
	       on command line arguments.

       -A      Display the apparent size instead of the	disk usage.  This  can
	       be  helpful  when  operating  on	 compressed  volumes or	sparse
	       files.

       -B blocksize
	       Calculate block counts in blocksize byte	blocks.	 This is  dif-
	       ferent  from  the  -h,  -k,  -m,	--si and -g options or setting
	       BLOCKSIZE and gives an estimate of how much space the  examined
	       file  hierarchy	would  require	on a filesystem	with the given
	       blocksize.  Unless in -A	mode, blocksize	is rounded up  to  the
	       next multiple of	512.

       -H      Symbolic	links on the command line are followed,	symbolic links
	       in file hierarchies are not followed.

       -I mask
	       Ignore files and	directories matching the specified mask.

       -L      Symbolic	 links on the command line and in file hierarchies are
	       followed.

       -P      No symbolic links are followed.	This is	the default.

       -a      Display an entry	for each file in a file	hierarchy.

       -c      Display a grand total.

       -d depth
	       Display an entry	for all	files and directories  depth  directo-
	       ries deep.

       -g      Display block counts in 1073741824-byte (1 GiB) blocks.

       -h      "Human-readable"	 output.   Use	unit suffixes: Byte, Kilobyte,
	       Megabyte, Gigabyte, Terabyte and	Petabyte based	on  powers  of
	       1024.

       -k      Display block counts in 1024-byte (1 kiB) blocks.

       -l      If  a  file  has	 multiple  hard	links, count its size multiple
	       times.  The default behavior of du is to	count files with  mul-
	       tiple  hard  links only once.  When the -l option is specified,
	       the hard	link checks are	disabled, and these files are  counted
	       (and displayed) as many times as	they are found.

       -m      Display block counts in 1048576-byte (1 MiB) blocks.

       -n      Ignore	files	and   directories   with  user	"nodump"  flag
	       (UF_NODUMP) set.

       -r      Generate	messages about directories that	cannot be read,	 files
	       that  cannot  be	 opened, and so	on.  This is the default case.
	       This  option  exists  solely  for   conformance	 with	X/Open
	       Portability Guide Issue 4 ("XPG4").

       -s      Display an entry	for each specified file.  (Equivalent to -d 0)

       --si    "Human-readable"	 output.   Use	unit suffixes: Byte, Kilobyte,
	       Megabyte, Gigabyte, Terabyte and	Petabyte based	on  powers  of
	       1000.

       -t threshold
	       Display	only  entries  for  which  size	exceeds	threshold.  If
	       threshold is negative, display only entries for which  size  is
	       less than the absolute value of threshold.

       -x      File system mount points	are not	traversed.

       The  du	utility	 counts	the storage used by symbolic links and not the
       files they reference unless the -H or -L	option is specified.   If  ei-
       ther  the  -H  or  -L option is specified, storage used by any symbolic
       links which are followed	is not counted (or displayed).	The -H,	-L and
       -P options override each	other and the command's	actions	are determined
       by the last one specified.

       The -h, -k, -m and --si options all override each other;	the  last  one
       specified determines the	block counts used.

ENVIRONMENT
       BLOCKSIZE  If  the  environment	variable BLOCKSIZE is set, and the -h,
		  -k, -m or --si options are not specified, the	 block	counts
		  will be displayed in units of	that block size.  If BLOCKSIZE
		  is not set, and the -h, -k, -m or --si options are not spec-
		  ified,  the  block  counts  will  be	displayed  in 512-byte
		  blocks.

EXAMPLES
       Show disk usage for all files in	the current directory.	Output	is  in
       human-readable form:

	     # du -ah

       Summarize disk usage in the current directory:

	     # du -hs

       Summarize disk usage for	a specific directory:

	     # du -hs /home

       Show  name  and size of all C files in a	specific directory.  Also dis-
       play a grand total at the end:

	     # du -ch /usr/src/sys/kern/*.c

SEE ALSO
       df(1),  chflags(2),  fts(3),  libxo(3),	xo_parse_args(3),  symlink(7),
       quot(8)

STANDARDS
       The  du	utility	is compliant with the IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 ("POSIX.1")
       specification.

       The flags [-cdhP], as well as the BLOCKSIZE environment	variable,  are
       extensions to that specification.

       The  flag  [-r] is accepted but ignored,	for compatibility with systems
       implementing  the  obsolete  X/Open  Commands  and  Utilities  Issue  5
       ("XCU5")	standard.

HISTORY
       The  du	utility	 and its -a and	-s options first appeared in Version 1
       AT&T UNIX.

       The -r option first appeared in AT&T System III UNIX and	 is  available
       since FreeBSD 3.5.  The -k and -x options first appeared	in 4.3BSD-Reno
       and  -H	in  4.4BSD.   The  -c and -L options first appeared in the GNU
       fileutils; -L and  -P  are  available  since  4.4BSD  Lite1,  -c	 since
       FreeBSD	2.2.6.	 The -d	option first appeared in FreeBSD 2.2, -h first
       appeared	in FreeBSD 4.0.

AUTHORS
       This version of du was written by  Chris	 Newcomb  for  4.3BSD-Reno  in
       1989.

FreeBSD	13.2			April 29, 2024				 DU(1)
