FMT(1)			    General Commands Manual			FMT(1)

NAME
       fmt -- simple text formatter

SYNOPSIS
       fmt	[-cmnps]      [-d     chars]	 [-l	 num]	  [-t	  num]
	   [goal [maximum] | -width | -w width]	[file ...]

DESCRIPTION
       The fmt utility is a simple text	formatter which	reads  the  concatena-
       tion  of	input files (or	standard input if none are given) and produces
       on standard output a version of its input with lines as	close  to  the
       goal length as possible without exceeding the maximum.  The goal	length
       defaults	to 65 and the maximum to 10 more than the goal length.	Alter-
       natively,  a single width parameter can be specified either by prepend-
       ing a hyphen to it or by	using -w.  For	example,  "fmt	-w  72",  "fmt
       -72", and "fmt 72 72" all produce identical output.  The	spacing	at the
       beginning  of  the input	lines is preserved in the output, as are blank
       lines and interword spacing.  Lines are joined or split only  at	 white
       space; that is, words are never joined or hyphenated.

       The options are as follows:

       -c      Center the text,	line by	line.  In this case, most of the other
	       options are ignored; no splitting or joining of lines is	done.

       -m      Try  to	format mail header lines contained in the input	sensi-
	       bly.

       -n      Format lines beginning with a `.' (dot) character.

       -p      Allow indented paragraphs.  Without the -p flag,	any change  in
	       the  amount  of	whitespace at the start	of a line results in a
	       new paragraph being begun.

       -s      Collapse	whitespace inside lines, so that  multiple  whitespace
	       characters  are turned into a single space.  (Or, at the	end of
	       a sentence, a double space.)

       -d chars
	       Treat the chars (and no others) as sentence-ending  characters.
	       By  default the sentence-ending characters are full stop	(`.'),
	       question	mark (`?') and exclamation mark	(`!').	Remember  that
	       some  characters	 may  need  to be escaped to protect them from
	       your shell.

       -l number
	       Replace multiple	spaces with tabs at the	start of  each	output
	       line,  if  possible.   Each number spaces will be replaced with
	       one tab.	 The default is	8.  If number is 0,  spaces  are  pre-
	       served.

       -t number
	       Assume  that the	input files' tabs assume number	spaces per tab
	       stop.  The default is 8.

       The fmt utility is meant	to format mail messages	prior to sending,  but
       may also	be useful for other simple tasks.  For instance, within	visual
       mode of the ex(1) editor	(e.g., vi(1)) the command

	     !}fmt

       will reformat a paragraph, evening the lines.

ENVIRONMENT
       The  LANG,  LC_ALL and LC_CTYPE environment variables affect the	execu-
       tion of fmt as described	in environ(7).

EXAMPLES
       Center the text in standard input:

	     $ echo -e 'The merit of all things\nlies\nin their	difficulty' | fmt -c
				  The merit of all things
					    lies
				    in their difficulty

       Format the text in standard input collapsing spaces:

	     $ echo -e 'Multiple   spaces    will be collapsed'	| fmt -s
	     Multiple spaces will be collapsed

SEE ALSO
       fold(1),	mail(1)

HISTORY
       The fmt command appeared	in 3BSD.

       The version described herein is a  complete  rewrite  and  appeared  in
       FreeBSD 4.4.

AUTHORS
       Kurt Shoens
       Liz Allen (added	goal length concept)
       Gareth McCaughan

BUGS
       The program was designed	to be simple and fast -	for more complex oper-
       ations, the standard text processors are	likely to be more appropriate.

       When  the  first	 line of an indented paragraph is very long (more than
       about twice the goal length), the indentation  in  the  output  can  be
       wrong.

       The fmt utility is not infallible in guessing what lines	are mail head-
       ers and what lines are not.

FreeBSD	13.2		       October 29, 2020				FMT(1)
