LS(1)			    General Commands Manual			 LS(1)

NAME
       ls -- list directory contents

SYNOPSIS
       ls      [-ABCFGHILPRSTUWZabcdfghiklmnopqrstuvwxy1,]	[--color=when]
	  [-D format] [file ...]

DESCRIPTION
       For each	operand	that names a file of a type other than	directory,  ls
       displays	 its  name  as	well as	any requested, associated information.
       For each	operand	that names a file of type directory, ls	 displays  the
       names  of  files	 contained  within  that directory, as well as any re-
       quested,	associated information.

       If no operands are given, the contents of  the  current	directory  are
       displayed.   If	more than one operand is given,	non-directory operands
       are displayed first; directory and non-directory	 operands  are	sorted
       separately and in lexicographical order.

       The following options are available:

       -A      Include	directory  entries  whose names	begin with a dot (`.')
	       except for . and	...  Automatically set for the super-user  un-
	       less -I is specified.

       -B      Force  printing	of  non-printable  characters  (as  defined by
	       ctype(3)	and current locale settings) in	file  names  as	 \xxx,
	       where xxx is the	numeric	value of the character in octal.  This
	       option is not defined in	IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 ("POSIX.1").

       -C      Force  multi-column  output; this is the	default	when output is
	       to a terminal.

       -D format
	       When printing in	the long (-l) format, use format to format the
	       date and	time output.  The argument format is a string used  by
	       strftime(3).   Depending	 on  the choice	of format string, this
	       may result in a different number	 of  columns  in  the  output.
	       This  option  overrides	the -T option.	This option is not de-
	       fined in	IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 ("POSIX.1").

       -F      Display a slash (`/') immediately after each pathname that is a
	       directory, an asterisk (`*') after each that is executable,  an
	       at  sign	 (`@')	after each symbolic link, an equals sign (`=')
	       after each socket, a percent sign (`%')	after  each  whiteout,
	       and a vertical bar (`|')	after each that	is a FIFO.

       -G      Enable colorized	output.	 This option is	equivalent to defining
	       CLICOLOR	  or   COLORTERM   in	the  environment  and  setting
	       --color=auto.  (See below.)  This functionality can be compiled
	       out by removing the definition of COLORLS.  This	option is  not
	       defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 ("POSIX.1").

       -H      Symbolic	 links	on the command line are	followed.  This	option
	       is assumed if none of the -F, -d, or -l options are specified.

       -I      Prevent -A from being automatically  set	 for  the  super-user.
	       This option is not defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 ("POSIX.1").

       -L      If  argument is a symbolic link,	list the file or directory the
	       link references rather than the link itself.  This option  can-
	       cels the	-P option.

       -P      If  argument  is	 a  symbolic link, list	the link itself	rather
	       than the	object the link	references.  This option  cancels  the
	       -H and -L options.

       -R      Recursively list	subdirectories encountered.

       -S      Sort  by	 size (largest file first) before sorting the operands
	       in lexicographical order.

       -T      When printing in	the long (-l) format,  display	complete  time
	       information  for	 the file, including month, day, hour, minute,
	       second, and year.  The -D option	gives even more	 control  over
	       the  output  format.   This  option  is not defined in IEEE Std
	       1003.1-2008 ("POSIX.1").

       -U      Use time	when file was created for sorting or  printing.	  This
	       option is not defined in	IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 ("POSIX.1").

       -W      Display	whiteouts  when	 scanning directories.	This option is
	       not defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 ("POSIX.1").

       -Z      Display each file's MAC label; see maclabel(7).	This option is
	       not defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 ("POSIX.1").

       -a      Include directory entries whose names begin with	a dot (`.').

       -b      As -B, but use C	escape codes whenever possible.	  This	option
	       is not defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 ("POSIX.1").

       -c      Use  time  when	file  status  was  last	changed	for sorting or
	       printing.

       --color=when
	       Output colored escape sequences based on	when, which may	be set
	       to either always, auto, or never.

	       always will make	ls always output color.	 If TERM is  unset  or
	       set  to an invalid terminal, then ls will fall back to explicit
	       ANSI escape sequences without the help of  termcap(5).	always
	       is the default if --color is specified without an argument.

	       auto  will make ls output escape	sequences based	on termcap(5),
	       but only	if stdout is a tty and either the -G flag is specified
	       or one of the environment variables COLORTERM  or  CLICOLOR  is
	       set and not empty.

	       never  will  disable color regardless of	environment variables.
	       never is	the default when neither --color nor -G	is specified.

	       For compatibility with GNU coreutils, ls	supports yes or	 force
	       as equivalent to	always,	no or none as equivalent to never, and
	       tty or if-tty as	equivalent to auto.

       -d      Directories  are	 listed	 as  plain  files (not searched	recur-
	       sively).

       -f      Output is not sorted.   This  option  turns  on	-a.   It  also
	       negates the effect of the -r, -S	and -t options.	 As allowed by
	       IEEE  Std 1003.1-2008 ("POSIX.1"), this option has no effect on
	       the -d, -l, -R and -s options.

       -g      Display the long	(-l) format output without  the	 file  owner's
	       name or number.

       -h      When  used  with	 the -l	option,	use unit suffixes: Byte, Kilo-
	       byte, Megabyte, Gigabyte, Terabyte and Petabyte in order	to re-
	       duce the	number of digits to four or fewer  using  base	2  for
	       sizes.	This  option  is  not  defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008
	       ("POSIX.1").

       -i      For each	file, print the	file's file serial number (inode  num-
	       ber).

       -k      This  has  the  same  effect  as	 setting  environment variable
	       BLOCKSIZE to 1024, except that it also nullifies	any -h options
	       to its left.

       -l      (The lowercase letter "ell".)  List files in the	 long  format,
	       as described in the "The	Long Format" subsection	below.

       -m      Stream  output format; list files across	the page, separated by
	       commas.

       -n      Display user and	group IDs numerically rather  than  converting
	       to a user or group name in a long (-l) output.

       -o      Include	the  file flags	in a long (-l) output.	This option is
	       incompatible  with  IEEE	 Std  1003.1-2008  ("POSIX.1").	   See
	       chflags(1) for a	list of	file flags and their meanings.

       -p      Write  a	 slash (`/') after each	filename if that file is a di-
	       rectory.

       -q      Force printing of non-graphic characters	in file	names  as  the
	       character  `?';	this is	the default when output	is to a	termi-
	       nal.

       -r      Reverse the order of the	sort.

       -s      Display the number of blocks used in the	file  system  by  each
	       file.   Block  sizes  and  directory  totals are	handled	as de-
	       scribed in "The Long Format" subsection below, except  (if  the
	       long format is not also requested) the directory	totals are not
	       output  when  the  output is in a single	column,	even if	multi-
	       column output is	requested.

       -t      Sort  by	 descending  time  modified  (most  recently  modified
	       first).	 If  two  files	 have the same modification timestamp,
	       sort their names	in ascending lexicographical  order.   The  -r
	       option reverses both of these sort orders.

	       Note  that  these  sort	orders are contradictory: the time se-
	       quence is in descending order, the lexicographical sort	is  in
	       ascending  order.  This behavior	is mandated by IEEE Std	1003.2
	       ("POSIX.2").  This feature can  cause  problems	listing	 files
	       stored  with sequential names on	FAT file systems, such as from
	       digital cameras,	where it is possible to	have more than one im-
	       age with	the same timestamp.  In	such a case, the photos	cannot
	       be listed in the	sequence in which they were taken.  To	ensure
	       the  same  sort order for time and for lexicographical sorting,
	       set the environment variable LS_SAMESORT	or use the -y  option.
	       This  causes  ls	to reverse the lexicographical sort order when
	       sorting files with the same modification	timestamp.

       -u      Use time	of last	access,	instead	of time	of  last  modification
	       of the file for sorting (-t) or printing	(-l).

       -v      Sort  following a natural ordering, using strverscmp(3) instead
	       of strcoll(3) as	the comparison function.  E.g.,	files  lexico-
	       graphically ordered "bloem1", "bloem10",	and "bloem9" would in-
	       stead  be  ordered  "bloem1",  "bloem9",	 and "bloem10",	as one
	       would perhaps expect.

       -w      Force raw printing of non-printable characters.	 This  is  the
	       default	when  output is	not to a terminal.  This option	is not
	       defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2001 ("POSIX.1").

       -x      The same	as -C, except that the multi-column output is produced
	       with entries sorted across, rather than down, the columns.

       -y      When the	-t option is set, sort the alphabetical	output in  the
	       same  order  as	the  time output.  This	has the	same effect as
	       setting LS_SAMESORT.  See the description of the	-t option  for
	       more   details.	 This  option  is  not	defined	 in  IEEE  Std
	       1003.1-2001 ("POSIX.1").

       -1      (The numeric digit "one".)  Force output	to be  one  entry  per
	       line.  This is the default when output is not to	a terminal.

       -,      (Comma) When the	-l option is set, print	file sizes grouped and
	       separated  by  thousands	 using	the non-monetary separator re-
	       turned by localeconv(3),	typically a comma or  period.	If  no
	       locale is set, or the locale does not have a non-monetary sepa-
	       rator,  this  option has	no effect.  This option	is not defined
	       in IEEE Std 1003.1-2001 ("POSIX.1").

       The -1, -C, -x, and -l options all override each	other;	the  last  one
       specified determines the	format used.

       The -c, -u, and -U options all override each other; the last one	speci-
       fied determines the file	time used.

       The  -S,	 -t and	-v options override each other;	the last one specified
       determines the sort order used.

       The -B, -b, -w, and -q options all override each	other;	the  last  one
       specified determines the	format used for	non-printable characters.

       The  -H,	-L and -P options all override each other (either partially or
       fully); they are	applied	in the order specified.

       By default, ls lists one	entry per line to standard output; the	excep-
       tions are to terminals or when the -C or	-x options are specified.

       File  information is displayed with one or more <blank>s	separating the
       information associated with the -i, -s, and -l options.

   The Long Format
       If the -l option	is given, the following	information is	displayed  for
       each  file: file	mode, number of	links, owner name, group name, MAC la-
       bel, number of bytes in the file, abbreviated month, day-of-month  file
       was  last modified, hour	file last modified, minute file	last modified,
       and the pathname.

       If the modification time	of the file is more than 6 months in the  past
       or  future,  and	 the  -D or -T are not specified, then the year	of the
       last modification is displayed in place of the hour and minute fields.

       If the owner or group names are not a known user	or group name, or  the
       -n option is given, the numeric ID's are	displayed.

       If  the	file  is a character special or	block special file, the	device
       number for the file is displayed	in the size field.  If the file	 is  a
       symbolic	link the pathname of the linked-to file	is preceded by "->".

       The  listing  of	 a directory's contents	is preceded by a labeled total
       number of blocks	used in	the file system	by the files which are	listed
       as  the directory's contents (which may or may not include . and	.. and
       other files which start with a dot, depending on	other options).

       The default block size is 512 bytes.  The block size may	 be  set  with
       option  -k or environment variable BLOCKSIZE.  Numbers of blocks	in the
       output will have	been rounded up	so the numbers of bytes	is at least as
       many as used by the corresponding file system blocks (which might  have
       a different size).

       The  file  mode	printed	under the -l option consists of	the entry type
       and the permissions.  The entry type character describes	 the  type  of
       file, as	follows:

	     -	   Regular file.
	     b	   Block special file.
	     c	   Character special file.
	     d	   Directory.
	     l	   Symbolic link.
	     p	   FIFO.
	     s	   Socket.
	     w	   Whiteout.

       The  next  three	 fields	 are three characters each: owner permissions,
       group permissions, and other permissions.  Each field has three charac-
       ter positions:

	     1.	  If r,	the file is readable; if -, it is not readable.

	     2.	  If w,	the file is writable; if -, it is not writable.

	     3.	  The first of the following that applies:

			S     If in the	owner permissions, the file is not ex-
			      ecutable and set-user-ID mode is set.  If	in the
			      group permissions, the file  is  not  executable
			      and set-group-ID mode is set.

			s     If  in  the  owner permissions, the file is exe-
			      cutable and set-user-ID mode is set.  If in  the
			      group  permissions,  the	file is	executable and
			      setgroup-ID mode is set.

			x     The file	is  executable	or  the	 directory  is
			      searchable.

			-     The  file	 is  neither  readable,	writable, exe-
			      cutable, nor set-user-ID nor set-group-ID	 mode,
			      nor sticky.  (See	below.)

		  These	next two apply only to the third character in the last
		  group	(other permissions).

			T     The  sticky bit is set (mode 1000), but not exe-
			      cute or search  permission.   (See  chmod(1)  or
			      sticky(7).)

			t     The  sticky  bit	is  set	 (mode	1000),	and is
			      searchable  or  executable.   (See  chmod(1)  or
			      sticky(7).)

       The  next field contains	a plus (`+') character if the file has an ACL,
       or a space (` ')	if it does not.	 The ls	utility	does not show the  ac-
       tual ACL; use getfacl(1)	to do this.

ENVIRONMENT
       The following environment variables affect the execution	of ls:

       BLOCKSIZE       If this is set, its value, rounded up to	512 or down to
		       a  multiple  of	512, will be used as the block size in
		       bytes by	the -l and -s options.	See "The Long  Format"
		       subsection for more information.

       CLICOLOR	       Use  ANSI  color	 sequences  to distinguish file	types.
		       See LSCOLORS below.  In addition	to the file types men-
		       tioned in the -F	option some extra  attributes  (setuid
		       bit set,	etc.) are also displayed.  The colorization is
		       dependent on a terminal type with the proper termcap(5)
		       capabilities.   The  default  "cons25"  console has the
		       proper capabilities, but	to display the	colors	in  an
		       xterm(1)	(ports/x11/xterm), for example,	the TERM vari-
		       able  must  be  set  to	"xterm-color".	Other terminal
		       types may require similar adjustments.  Colorization is
		       silently	disabled if the	output is not  directed	 to  a
		       terminal	 unless	the CLICOLOR_FORCE variable is defined
		       or --color is set to "always".

       CLICOLOR_FORCE  Color sequences are normally disabled if	the output  is
		       not  directed to	a terminal.  This can be overridden by
		       setting this variable.  The TERM	variable  still	 needs
		       to reference a color capable terminal however otherwise
		       it  is  not possible to determine which color sequences
		       to use.

       COLORTERM       See description for CLICOLOR above.

       COLUMNS	       If this variable	contains a string representing a deci-
		       mal integer, it is used as the  column  position	 width
		       for  displaying	multiple-text-column  output.	The ls
		       utility calculates how many pathname  text  columns  to
		       display based on	the width provided.  (See -C and -x.)

       LANG	       The locale to use when determining the order of day and
		       month in	the long -l format output.  See	environ(7) for
		       more information.

       LSCOLORS	       The  value of this variable describes what color	to use
		       for  which  attribute  when  colors  are	 enabled  with
		       CLICOLOR	 or COLORTERM.	This string is a concatenation
		       of pairs	of the format fb, where	f  is  the  foreground
		       color  and  b  is the background	color.	When the back-
		       ground color is capitalized, the	text is	underlined.

		       The color designators are as follows:

			     a	   black
			     b	   red
			     c	   green
			     d	   brown
			     e	   blue
			     f	   magenta
			     g	   cyan
			     h	   light grey
			     A	   bold	or underlined black, usually shows  up
				   as dark grey
			     B	   bold	or underlined red
			     C	   bold	or underlined green
			     D	   bold	 or underlined brown, usually shows up
				   as yellow
			     E	   bold	or underlined blue
			     F	   bold	or underlined magenta
			     G	   bold	or underlined cyan
			     H	   bold	or underlined light grey;  looks  like
				   bright white
			     x	   default foreground or background
			     X	   default  foreground	or background, with an
				   underline or	bold

		       Note that the above are standard	ANSI colors.  The  ac-
		       tual display may	differ depending on the	color capabil-
		       ities of	the terminal in	use.

		       The order of the	attributes are as follows:

			     1.	  directory
			     2.	  symbolic link
			     3.	  socket
			     4.	  pipe
			     5.	  executable
			     6.	  block	special
			     7.	  character special
			     8.	  executable with setuid bit set
			     9.	  executable with setgid bit set
			     10.  directory  writable  to  others, with	sticky
				  bit
			     11.  directory writable to	others,	without	sticky
				  bit

		       The default  is	"exfxcxdxbxegedabagacad",  i.e.,  blue
		       foreground  and default background for regular directo-
		       ries, black foreground and red  background  for	setuid
		       executables, etc.

       LS_COLWIDTHS    If  this	 variable  is  set,  it	 is considered to be a
		       colon-delimited list of minimum column widths.	Unrea-
		       sonable	and insufficient widths	are ignored (thus zero
		       signifies a dynamically sized column).  Not all columns
		       have changeable widths.	The fields are,	in order:  in-
		       ode,  block  count,  number  of links, user name, group
		       name, flags, file size, file name.

       LS_SAMESORT     If this variable	is set,	the -t option sorts the	 names
		       of  files  with	the same modification timestamp	in the
		       same sense as the time sort.  See  the  description  of
		       the -t option for more details.

       TERM	       The  CLICOLOR  and COLORTERM functionality depends on a
		       terminal	type with color	capabilities.

       TZ	       The  timezone  to  use  when  displaying	 dates.	   See
		       environ(7) for more information.

EXIT STATUS
       The ls utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error occurs.

EXAMPLES
       List the	contents of the	current	working	directory in long format:

	     $ ls -l

       In addition to listing the contents of the current working directory in
       long  format, show inode	numbers, file flags (see chflags(1)), and suf-
       fix each	filename with a	symbol representing its	file type:

	     $ ls -lioF

       List the	files in /var/log, sorting the output such that	the mostly re-
       cently modified entries are printed first:

	     $ ls -lt /var/log

COMPATIBILITY
       The group field is now automatically included in	the long  listing  for
       files  in  order	 to be compatible with the IEEE	Std 1003.2 ("POSIX.2")
       specification.

SEE ALSO
       chflags(1), chmod(1), getfacl(1), sort(1), xterm(1)  (ports/x11/xterm),
       localeconv(3),	strcoll(3),  strftime(3),  strmode(3),	strverscmp(3),
       termcap(5), maclabel(7),	sticky(7), symlink(7), getfmac(8)

STANDARDS
       With the	exception of options -g, -n and	-o, the	ls utility conforms to
       IEEE Std	1003.1-2001 ("POSIX.1")	and IEEE Std 1003.1-2008  ("POSIX.1").
       The  options  -B, -D, -G, -I, -T, -U, -W, -Z, -b, -h, -v, -w, -y	and -,
       are non-standard	extensions.

       The ACL support	is  compatible	with  IEEE  Std	 1003.2c  ("POSIX.2c")
       Draft 17	(withdrawn).

HISTORY
       An ls command appeared in Version 1 AT&T	UNIX.

       The -v option was added in FreeBSD 13.2.

BUGS
       To  maintain backward compatibility, the	relationships between the many
       options are quite complex.

       The exception mentioned in the -s option	description might be a feature
       that was	based on the fact that single-column output  usually  goes  to
       something other than a terminal.	 It is debatable whether this is a de-
       sign bug.

       IEEE  Std  1003.2  ("POSIX.2")  mandates	opposite sort orders for files
       with the	same timestamp when sorting with the -t	option.

FreeBSD	13.2		       February	21, 2024			 LS(1)
