MKDIR(1)		    General Commands Manual		      MKDIR(1)

NAME
       mkdir --	make directories

SYNOPSIS
       mkdir [-pv] [-m mode] directory_name ...

DESCRIPTION
       The mkdir utility creates the directories named as operands, in the or-
       der specified, using mode "rwxrwxrwx" (0777) as modified	by the current
       umask(2).

       The options are as follows:

       -m mode	Set the	file permission	bits of	the final created directory to
		the  specified	mode.	The mode argument can be in any	of the
		formats	specified to the chmod(1) command.  If a symbolic mode
		is specified, the operation characters `+' and `-' are	inter-
		preted relative	to an initial mode of "a=rwx".

       -p	Create	intermediate  directories as required.	If this	option
		is not specified, the full path	prefix of  each	 operand  must
		already	exist.	On the other hand, with	this option specified,
		no  error  will	be reported if a directory given as an operand
		already	exists.	 Intermediate  directories  are	 created  with
		permission  bits of "rwxrwxrwx"	(0777) as modified by the cur-
		rent umask, plus write and search permission for the owner.

       -v	Be verbose when	creating directories, listing them as they are
		created.

       The user	must have write	permission in the parent directory.

EXIT STATUS
       The mkdir utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error	occurs.

EXAMPLES
       Create a	directory named	foobar:

	     $ mkdir foobar

       Create a	directory named	foobar and set its file	mode to	700:

	     $ mkdir -m	700 foobar

       Create a	directory named	cow/horse/monkey,  creating  any  non-existent
       intermediate directories	as necessary:

	     $ mkdir -p	cow/horse/monkey

COMPATIBILITY
       The  -v	option	is  non-standard  and its use in scripts is not	recom-
       mended.

SEE ALSO
       rmdir(1)

STANDARDS
       The mkdir utility is expected to	be IEEE	Std 1003.2 ("POSIX.2") compat-
       ible.

HISTORY
       A mkdir command appeared	in Version 1 AT&T UNIX.

FreeBSD	13.2			March 15, 2013			      MKDIR(1)
