PASTE(1)		    General Commands Manual		      PASTE(1)

NAME
       paste --	merge corresponding or subsequent lines	of files

SYNOPSIS
       paste [-s] [-d list] file ...

DESCRIPTION
       The paste utility concatenates the corresponding	lines of the given in-
       put  files, replacing all but the last file's newline characters	with a
       single tab character, and writes	the resulting lines to	standard  out-
       put.   If  end-of-file  is  reached  on an input	file while other input
       files still contain data, the file is treated as	if it were an  endless
       source of empty lines.

       The options are as follows:

       -d list	   Use	one  or	more of	the provided characters	to replace the
		   newline characters instead of the default tab.  The charac-
		   ters	in list	are used circularly, i.e., when	 list  is  ex-
		   hausted the first character from list is reused.  This con-
		   tinues  until  a  line from the last	input file (in default
		   operation) or the last line in each file (using the -s  op-
		   tion)  is  displayed,  at which time	paste begins selecting
		   characters from the beginning of list again.

		   The following special characters can	also be	used in	list:

		   \n	 newline character
		   \t	 tab character
		   \\	 backslash character
		   \0	 Empty string (not a null character).

		   Any other character preceded	by a backslash	is  equivalent
		   to the character itself.

       -s	   Concatenate all of the lines	of each	separate input file in
		   command  line  order.   The newline character of every line
		   except the last line	in each	input file  is	replaced  with
		   the tab character, unless otherwise specified by the	-d op-
		   tion.

       If  `-'	is  specified for one or more of the input files, the standard
       input is	used; standard input is	read one line at a  time,  circularly,
       for each	instance of `-'.

EXIT STATUS
       The paste utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error	occurs.

EXAMPLES
       List the	files in the current directory in three	columns:

	     ls	| paste	- - -

       Combine pairs of	lines from a file into single lines:

	     paste -s -d '\t\n'	myfile

       Number the lines	in a file, similar to nl(1):

	     sed = myfile | paste - -

       Create  a  colon-separated  list	of directories named bin, suitable for
       use in the PATH environment variable:

	     find / -name bin -type d |	paste -s -d : -

SEE ALSO
       cut(1), lam(1)

STANDARDS
       The paste utility is expected to	be IEEE	Std 1003.2 ("POSIX.2") compat-
       ible.

HISTORY
       A paste command first appeared in AT&T System III  UNIX	and  has  been
       available since 4.3BSD-Reno.

AUTHORS
       The  original  Bell Labs	version	was written by Gottfried W. R. Luderer
       and the BSD version by Adam S. Moskowitz	and Marciano Pitargue.

FreeBSD	13.2		       November	6, 2022			      PASTE(1)
