SORT(1)			    General Commands Manual		       SORT(1)

NAME
       sort -- sort or merge records (lines) of	text and binary	files

SYNOPSIS
       sort  [-bcCdfghiRMmnrsuVz]  [-k field1[,field2]]	 [-S memsize] [-T dir]
	    [-t	char] [-o output] [file	...]
       sort --help
       sort --version

DESCRIPTION
       The sort	utility	sorts text and binary files by lines.	A  line	 is  a
       record  separated  from the subsequent record by	a newline (default) or
       NUL '\0'	character (-z option).	A record can contain any printable  or
       unprintable characters.	Comparisons are	based on one or	more sort keys
       extracted from each line	of input, and are performed lexicographically,
       according  to  the  current  locale's collating rules and the specified
       command-line options that can tune the actual sorting behavior.	By de-
       fault, if keys are not given, sort uses entire lines for	comparison.

       The command line	options	are as follows:

       -c, --check, -C,	--check=silent|quiet
	       Check that the single input file	is sorted.  If the file	is not
	       sorted, sort produces the appropriate error messages and	 exits
	       with  code  1, otherwise	returns	0.  If -C or --check=silent is
	       specified, sort produces	no output.  This is a "silent" version
	       of -c.

       -m, --merge
	       Merge only.  The	input files are	assumed	to be pre-sorted.   If
	       they are	not sorted the output order is undefined.

       -o output, --output=output
	       Print  the  output  to  the output file instead of the standard
	       output.

       -S size,	--buffer-size=size
	       Use size	for the	maximum	size of	the memory buffer.  Size modi-
	       fiers %,b,K,M,G,T,P,E,Z,Y can be	used.  If a  memory  limit  is
	       not  explicitly specified, sort takes up	to about 90% of	avail-
	       able memory.  If	the file size is too big to fit	into the  mem-
	       ory  buffer,  the  temporary disk files are used	to perform the
	       sorting.

       -T dir, --temporary-directory=dir
	       Store temporary files in	the directory dir.  The	 default  path
	       is  the value of	the environment	variable TMPDIR	or /var/tmp if
	       TMPDIR is not defined.

       -u, --unique
	       Unique keys.  Suppress all lines	that have a key	that is	 equal
	       to an already processed one.  This option, similarly to -s, im-
	       plies  a	 stable	sort.  If used with -c or -C, sort also	checks
	       that there are no lines with duplicate keys.

       -s      Stable sort.  This option maintains the original	 record	 order
	       of records that have an equal key.  This	is a non-standard fea-
	       ture, but it is widely accepted and used.

       --version
	       Print the version and silently exits.

       --help  Print the help text and silently	exits.

       The following options override the default ordering rules.  When	order-
       ing  options appear independently of key	field specifications, they ap-
       ply globally to all sort	keys.  When attached to	a  specific  key  (see
       -k),  the ordering options override all global ordering options for the
       key they	are attached to.

       -b, --ignore-leading-blanks
	       Ignore leading blank characters when comparing lines.

       -d, --dictionary-order
	       Consider	only blank spaces and alphanumeric characters in  com-
	       parisons.

       -f, --ignore-case
	       Convert	all lowercase characters to their uppercase equivalent
	       before comparison, that is, perform case-independent sorting.

       -g, --general-numeric-sort, --sort=general-numeric
	       Sort by general numerical value.	 As opposed to -n, this	option
	       handles general floating	points.	 It has	a more permissive for-
	       mat than	that allowed by	-n but it has  a  significant  perfor-
	       mance drawback.

       -h, --human-numeric-sort, --sort=human-numeric
	       Sort  by	 numerical value, but take into	account	the SI suffix,
	       if present.  Sort first by numeric  sign	 (negative,  zero,  or
	       positive);  then	 by SI suffix (either empty, or	`k' or `K', or
	       one of `MGTPEZY', in that order); and finally by	numeric	value.
	       The SI suffix must immediately follow the number.  For example,
	       '12345K'	sorts before '1M', because M is	"larger" than K.  This
	       sort option is useful for sorting the output of a single	 invo-
	       cation of 'df' command with -h or -H options (human-readable).

       -i, --ignore-nonprinting
	       Ignore all non-printable	characters.

       -M, --month-sort, --sort=month
	       Sort by month.  Unknown strings are considered smaller than the
	       month names.

       -n, --numeric-sort, --sort=numeric
	       Sort  fields  numerically by arithmetic value.  Fields are sup-
	       posed to	have optional blanks in	the beginning, an optional mi-
	       nus sign, zero or more digits (including	decimal	point and pos-
	       sible thousand separators).

       -R, --random-sort, --sort=random
	       Sort by a random	order.	This is	a random  permutation  of  the
	       inputs  except that the equal keys sort together.  It is	imple-
	       mented by hashing the input keys	and sorting the	 hash  values.
	       The  hash  function  is	chosen randomly.  The hash function is
	       randomized by /dev/random content, or by	file content if	it  is
	       specified by --random-source.  Even if multiple sort fields are
	       specified,  the	same  random  hash function is used for	all of
	       them.

       -r, --reverse
	       Sort in reverse order.

       -V, --version-sort
	       Sort version numbers.  The input	 lines	are  treated  as  file
	       names  in  form PREFIX VERSION SUFFIX, where SUFFIX matches the
	       regular expression "(.([A-Za-z~][A-Za-z0-9~]*)?)*".  The	 files
	       are  compared by	their prefixes and versions (leading zeros are
	       ignored in version numbers, see example below).	 If  an	 input
	       string  does  not  match	the pattern, then it is	compared using
	       the byte	compare	function.  All	string	comparisons  are  per-
	       formed in C locale, the locale environment setting is ignored.

	       Example:

	       $ ls sort* | sort -V

	       sort-1.022.tgz

	       sort-1.23.tgz

	       sort-1.23.1.tgz

	       sort-1.024.tgz

	       sort-1.024.003.

	       sort-1.024.003.tgz

	       sort-1.024.07.tgz

	       sort-1.024.009.tgz

       The treatment of	field separators can be	altered	using these options:

       -b, --ignore-leading-blanks
	       Ignore  leading	blank space when determining the start and end
	       of a restricted sort key	(see -k).  If -b is  specified	before
	       the  first -k option, it	applies	globally to all	key specifica-
	       tions.  Otherwise, -b can be  attached  independently  to  each
	       field argument of the key specifications.  -b.

       -k field1[,field2], --key=field1[,field2]
	       Define  a  restricted  sort  key	that has the starting position
	       field1, and optional ending position field2  of	a  key	field.
	       The  -k	option	may be specified multiple times, in which case
	       subsequent keys are compared when earlier keys  compare	equal.
	       The  -k	option	replaces the obsolete options +pos1 and	-pos2,
	       but the old notation is also supported.

       -t char,	--field-separator=char
	       Use char	as a field separator character.	 The initial  char  is
	       not  considered to be part of a field when determining key off-
	       sets.  Each occurrence of char  is  significant	(for  example,
	       "charchar"  delimits  an	empty field).  If -t is	not specified,
	       the default field separator is a	sequence of blank space	 char-
	       acters,	and  consecutive  blank	spaces do not delimit an empty
	       field, however, the initial blank space is considered part of a
	       field when determining key offsets.  To use NUL as field	 sepa-
	       rator, use -t '\0'.

       -z, --zero-terminated
	       Use  NUL	as record separator.  By default, records in the files
	       are supposed to be separated by the newline  characters.	  With
	       this  option,  NUL ('\0') is used as a record separator charac-
	       ter.

       Other options:

       --batch-size=num
	       Specify maximum number of files that can	be opened by  sort  at
	       once.   This  option  affects  behavior	when having many input
	       files or	using temporary	files.	The default value is 16.

       --compress-program=PROGRAM
	       Use PROGRAM to compress temporary files.	 PROGRAM must compress
	       standard	input to standard output, when	called	without	 argu-
	       ments.	When  called with argument -d it must decompress stan-
	       dard input to standard output.  If  PROGRAM  fails,  sort  must
	       exit  with  error.  An example of PROGRAM that can be used here
	       is bzip2.

       --random-source=filename
	       In random sort, the file	content	is used	as the source  of  the
	       'seed'  data  for the hash function choice.  Two	invocations of
	       random sort with	the same seed data  will  use  the  same  hash
	       function	 and will produce the same result if the input is also
	       identical.  By default, file /dev/random	is used.

       --debug
	       Print some extra	information about the sorting process  to  the
	       standard	output.

       --files0-from=filename
	       Take  the  input	 file  list  from the file filename.  The file
	       names must be separated by NUL (like the	output produced	by the
	       command "find ... -print0").

       --radixsort
	       Try to use radix	sort, if the sort specifications  allow.   The
	       radix  sort can only be used for	trivial	locales	(C and POSIX),
	       and it cannot be	used for numeric or month sort.	 Radix sort is
	       very fast and stable.

       --mergesort
	       Use mergesort.  This is a universal algorithm that  can	always
	       be used,	but it is not always the fastest.

       --qsort
	       Try  to use quick sort, if the sort specifications allow.  This
	       sort algorithm cannot be	used with -u and -s.

       --heapsort
	       Try to use heap sort, if	the sort specifications	 allow.	  This
	       sort algorithm cannot be	used with -u and -s.

       --mmap  Try  to	use  file memory mapping system	call.  It may increase
	       speed in	some cases.

       The following operands are available:

       file    The pathname of a file to be sorted, merged, or checked.	 If no
	       file operands are specified, or if a file  operand  is  -,  the
	       standard	input is used.

       A  field	 is defined as a maximal sequence of characters	other than the
       field separator and record separator  (newline  by  default).   Initial
       blank  spaces  are  included in the field unless	-b has been specified;
       the first blank space of	a sequence of blank spaces acts	as  the	 field
       separator  and  is included in the field	(unless	-t is specified).  For
       example,	all blank spaces at the	beginning of a line are	considered  to
       be part of the first field.

       Fields are specified by the -k field1[,field2] command-line option.  If
       field2 is missing, the end of the key defaults to the end of the	line.

       The  arguments field1 and field2	have the form m.n (m,n > 0) and	can be
       followed	by one or more of the modifiers	b, d, f, i, n,	g,  M  and  r,
       which  correspond  to the options discussed above.  When	b is specified
       it applies only to field1 or field2 where it  is	 specified  while  the
       rest  of	 the modifiers apply to	the whole key field regardless if they
       are specified only with field1 or field2	or both.   A  field1  position
       specified by m.n	is interpreted as the nth character from the beginning
       of  the	mth  field.  A missing .n in field1 means `.1',	indicating the
       first character of the mth field; if the	-b option is in	effect,	 n  is
       counted	from  the  first  non-blank  character	in the mth field; m.1b
       refers to the first non-blank character in the mth field.   1.n	refers
       to  the	nth  character from the	beginning of the line; if n is greater
       than the	length of the line, the	field is taken to be empty.

       nth positions are always	counted	from the field beginning, even if  the
       field is	shorter	than the number	of specified positions.	 Thus, the key
       can really start	from a position	in a subsequent	field.

       A  field2 position specified by m.n is interpreted as the nth character
       (including separators) from the beginning of the	mth field.  A  missing
       .n  indicates the last character	of the mth field; m = 0	designates the
       end of a	line.  Thus the	option -k v.x,w.y is synonymous	with the obso-
       lete option +v-1.x-1 -w-1.y; when y is omitted, -k v.x,w	is  synonymous
       with  +v-1.x-1  -w.0.   The  obsolete  +pos1 -pos2 option is still sup-
       ported, except for -w.0b, which has no -k equivalent.

ENVIRONMENT
       LC_COLLATE  Locale settings to be used to determine the	collation  for
		   sorting records.

       LC_CTYPE	   Locale settings to be used to case conversion and classifi-
		   cation of characters, that is, which	characters are consid-
		   ered	whitespaces, etc.

       LC_MESSAGES
		   Locale  settings that determine the language	of output mes-
		   sages that sort prints out.

       LC_NUMERIC  Locale settings that	determine the number  format  used  in
		   numeric sort.

       LC_TIME	   Locale  settings  that  determine  the month	format used in
		   month sort.

       LC_ALL	   Locale settings that	override all of	the above locale  set-
		   tings.   This  environment  variable	can be used to set all
		   these settings to the same value at once.

       LANG	   Used	as a last resort to determine different	kinds  of  lo-
		   cale-specific  behavior  if neither the respective environ-
		   ment	variable, nor LC_ALL are set.

       TMPDIR	   Path	to the directory in  which  temporary  files  will  be
		   stored.   Note  that	TMPDIR may be overridden by the	-T op-
		   tion.

       GNUSORT_NUMERIC_COMPATIBILITY
		   If defined -t will not override the locale numeric symbols,
		   that	is, thousand separators	and  decimal  separators.   By
		   default, if we specify -t with the same symbol as the thou-
		   sand	separator or decimal point, the	symbol will be treated
		   as  the field separator.  Older behavior was	less definite;
		   the symbol was treated as both field	separator and  numeric
		   separator,  simultaneously.	 This environment variable en-
		   ables the old behavior.

FILES
       /var/tmp/.bsdsort.PID.*		 Temporary files.
       /dev/random			 Default  seed	file  for  the	random
					 sort.

EXIT STATUS
       The sort	utility	shall exit with	one of the following values:

       0     Successfully sorted the input files or if used with -c or -C, the
	     input file	already	met the	sorting	criteria.
       1     On	disorder (or non-uniqueness) with the -c or -C options.
       2     An	error occurred.

SEE ALSO
       comm(1),	join(1), uniq(1)

STANDARDS
       The sort	utility	is compliant with the IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 ("POSIX.1")
       specification.

       The flags [-ghRMSsTVz] are extensions to	the POSIX specification.

       All  long options are extensions	to the specification, some of them are
       provided	for compatibility with GNU versions and	some of	them  are  own
       extensions.

       The  old	key notations +pos1 and	-pos2 come from	older versions of sort
       and are still supported but their use is	highly discouraged.

HISTORY
       A sort command first appeared in	Version	1 AT&T UNIX.

AUTHORS
       Gabor Kovesdan <gabor@FreeBSD.org>,

       Oleg Moskalenko <mom040267@gmail.com>

NOTES
       This implementation of sort has no limits on input line	length	(other
       than  imposed by	available memory) or any restrictions on bytes allowed
       within lines.

       The performance depends highly on locale	settings, efficient choice  of
       sort  keys  and	key complexity.	 The fastest sort is with locale C, on
       whole lines, with option	-s.  In	general, locale	C is the fastest, then
       single-byte locales follow and multi-byte locales as  the  slowest  but
       the correct collation order is always respected.	 As for	the key	speci-
       fication,  the  simpler to process the lines the	faster the search will
       be.

       When sorting by arithmetic value, using -n results in much better  per-
       formance	than -g	so its use is encouraged whenever possible.

FreeBSD	13.2		       November	30, 2023		       SORT(1)
