STTY(1)			    General Commands Manual		       STTY(1)

NAME
       stty -- set the options for a terminal device interface

SYNOPSIS
       stty [-a	| -e | -g] [-f file] [arguments]

DESCRIPTION
       The  stty  utility  sets	or reports on terminal characteristics for the
       device that is its standard input.  If  no  options  or	arguments  are
       specified,  it  reports	the settings of	a subset of characteristics as
       well as additional ones if they differ from their default values.  Oth-
       erwise it modifies the terminal state according to the specified	 argu-
       ments.	Some  combinations of arguments	are mutually exclusive on some
       terminal	types.

       The following options are available:

       -a      Display all the current settings	for the	terminal  to  standard
	       output as per IEEE Std 1003.2 ("POSIX.2").

       -e      Display	all  the current settings for the terminal to standard
	       output in the traditional BSD ``all'' and  ``everything''  for-
	       mats.

       -f      Open and	use the	terminal named by file rather than using stan-
	       dard  input.   The  file	is opened using	the O_NONBLOCK flag of
	       open(), making it possible to set or display settings on	a ter-
	       minal that might	otherwise block	on the open.

       -g      Display all the current settings	for the	terminal  to  standard
	       output  in  a  form that	may be used as an argument to a	subse-
	       quent invocation	of stty	to restore the current terminal	 state
	       as per IEEE Std 1003.2 ("POSIX.2").

       The  following arguments	are available to set the terminal characteris-
       tics:

   Control Modes:
       Control mode flags affect hardware characteristics associated with  the
       terminal.  This corresponds to the c_cflag in the termios structure.

       parenb (-parenb)
		   Enable (disable) parity generation and detection.

       parodd (-parodd)
		   Select odd (even) parity.

       cs5 cs6 cs7 cs8
		   Select character size, if possible.

       number	   Set	terminal  baud	rate to	the number given, if possible.
		   If the baud rate is set to zero, modem control is no	longer
		   asserted.

       ispeed number
		   Set terminal	input baud rate	to the number given, if	possi-
		   ble.	 If the	input baud rate	is set to zero,	the input baud
		   rate	is set to the value of the output baud rate.

       ospeed number
		   Set terminal	output baud rate to the	number given, if  pos-
		   sible.   If the output baud rate is set to zero, modem con-
		   trol	is no longer asserted.

       speed number
		   This	sets both ispeed and ospeed to number.

       hupcl (-hupcl)
		   Stop	asserting modem	control	(do not	stop  asserting	 modem
		   control) on last close.

       hup (-hup)  Same	as hupcl (-hupcl).

       cstopb (-cstopb)
		   Use two (one) stop bits per character.

       cread (-cread)
		   Enable (disable) the	receiver.

       clocal (-clocal)
		   Assume a line without (with)	modem control.

       crtscts (-crtscts)
		   Enable (disable) RTS/CTS flow control.

       rtsdtr (-rtsdtr)
		   Enable (disable) asserting RTS/DTR on open.

   Input Modes:
       This corresponds	to the c_iflag in the termios structure.

       ignbrk (-ignbrk)
		   Ignore (do not ignore) break	on input.

       brkint (-brkint)
		   Signal (do not signal) INTR on break.

       ignpar (-ignpar)
		   Ignore (do not ignore) characters with parity errors.

       parmrk (-parmrk)
		   Mark	(do not	mark) characters with parity errors.

       inpck (-inpck)
		   Enable (disable) input parity checking.

       istrip (-istrip)
		   Strip (do not strip)	input characters to seven bits.

       inlcr (-inlcr)
		   Map (do not map) NL to CR on	input.

       igncr (-igncr)
		   Ignore (do not ignore) CR on	input.

       icrnl (-icrnl)
		   Map (do not map) CR to NL on	input.

       ixon (-ixon)
		   Enable  (disable)  START/STOP  output control.  Output from
		   the system is stopped when the  system  receives  STOP  and
		   started when	the system receives START, or if ixany is set,
		   any character restarts output.

       ixoff (-ixoff)
		   Request  that the system send (not send) START/STOP charac-
		   ters	when the input queue is	nearly empty/full.

       ixany (-ixany)
		   Allow any character (allow only START) to restart output.

       imaxbel (-imaxbel)
		   The system imposes a	limit  of  MAX_INPUT  (currently  255)
		   characters  in  the input queue.  If	imaxbel	is set and the
		   input queue limit has been reached, subsequent input	causes
		   the system to send an ASCII BEL  character  to  the	output
		   queue  (the	terminal beeps at you).	 Otherwise, if imaxbel
		   is unset and	the input queue	is full, the next input	 char-
		   acter  causes the entire input and output queues to be dis-
		   carded.

       iutf8 (-iutf8)
		   Assume that input characters	 are  UTF-8  encoded.  Setting
		   this	 flag  causes  backspace  to properly delete multibyte
		   characters in canonical mode.

   Output Modes:
       This corresponds	to the c_oflag of the termios structure.

       opost (-opost)
		   Post-process	output (do not post-process output; ignore all
		   other output	modes).

       onlcr (-onlcr)
		   Map (do not map) NL to CR-NL	on output.

       ocrnl (-ocrnl)
		   Map (do not map) CR to NL on	output.

       tab0 tab3   Select tab expansion	policy.	 tab0 disables tab  expansion,
		   while tab3 enables it.

       onocr (-onocr)
		   Do not (do) output CRs at column zero.

       onlret (-onlret)
		   On the terminal NL performs (does not perform) the CR func-
		   tion.

   Local Modes:
       Local  mode flags (lflags) affect various and sundry characteristics of
       terminal	processing.  Historically the term "local"  pertained  to  new
       job  control  features implemented by Jim Kulp on a Pdp 11/70 at	IIASA.
       Later the driver	ran on the first VAX at	Evans Hall, UC Berkeley, where
       the job control details were greatly modified but the structure defini-
       tions and names remained	essentially unchanged.	The second interpreta-
       tion of the 'l' in lflag	is ``line discipline flag'' which  corresponds
       to the c_lflag of the termios structure.

       isig (-isig)
		   Enable  (disable)  the  checking  of	characters against the
		   special control characters INTR, QUIT, and SUSP.

       icanon (-icanon)
		   Enable (disable) canonical input (ERASE and	KILL  process-
		   ing).

       iexten (-iexten)
		   Enable (disable) any	implementation defined special control
		   characters  not  currently  controlled  by icanon, isig, or
		   ixon.

       echo (-echo)
		   Echo	back (do not echo back)	every character	typed.

       echoe (-echoe)
		   The ERASE character shall (shall not)  visually  erase  the
		   last	 character  in	the  current line from the display, if
		   possible.

       echok (-echok)
		   Echo	(do not	echo) NL after KILL character.

       echoke (-echoke)
		   The KILL character shall (shall  not)  visually  erase  the
		   current line	from the display, if possible.

       echonl (-echonl)
		   Echo	(do not	echo) NL, even if echo is disabled.

       echoctl (-echoctl)
		   If  echoctl	is set,	echo control characters	as ^X.	Other-
		   wise	control	characters echo	as themselves.

       echoprt (-echoprt)
		   For printing	terminals.  If	set,  echo  erased  characters
		   backwards  within ``\'' and ``/''.  Otherwise, disable this
		   feature.

       noflsh (-noflsh)
		   Disable (enable) flush after	INTR, QUIT, SUSP.

       tostop (-tostop)
		   Send	(do not	send) SIGTTOU  for  background	output.	  This
		   causes  background  jobs  to	 stop if they attempt terminal
		   output.

       altwerase (-altwerase)
		   Use (do not use) an alternate  word	erase  algorithm  when
		   processing  WERASE  characters.   This  alternate algorithm
		   considers sequences of alphanumeric/underscores  as	words.
		   It  also skips the first preceding character	in its classi-
		   fication (as	a convenience since the	one preceding  charac-
		   ter could have been erased with simply an ERASE character.)

       mdmbuf (-mdmbuf)
		   If  set,  flow control output based on condition of Carrier
		   Detect.  Otherwise writes return an error if	Carrier	Detect
		   is low (and Carrier is not being ignored  with  the	CLOCAL
		   flag.)

       flusho (-flusho)
		   Indicates output is (is not)	being discarded.

       pendin (-pendin)
		   Indicates  input  is	 (is  not) pending after a switch from
		   non-canonical to canonical mode and will be re-input	when a
		   read	becomes	pending	or more	input arrives.

   Control Characters:
       control-character string
		   Set control-character to string.  If	 string	 is  a	single
		   character,  the control character is	set to that character.
		   If string is	the two	character sequence "^-"	or the	string
		   "undef"  the	 control  character  is	disabled (i.e.,	set to
		   {_POSIX_VDISABLE}.)

		   Recognized control-characters:


			 control-
			 character    Subscript	   Description
			 _________    _________	   _______________
			 eof	      VEOF	   EOF character
			 eol	      VEOL	   EOL character
			 eol2	      VEOL2	   EOL2	character
			 erase	      VERASE	   ERASE character
			 erase2	      VERASE2	   ERASE2 character
			 werase	      VWERASE	   WERASE character
			 intr	      VINTR	   INTR	character
			 kill	      VKILL	   KILL	character
			 quit	      VQUIT	   QUIT	character
			 susp	      VSUSP	   SUSP	character
			 start	      VSTART	   START character
			 stop	      VSTOP	   STOP	character
			 dsusp	      VDSUSP	   DSUSP character
			 lnext	      VLNEXT	   LNEXT character
			 reprint      VREPRINT	   REPRINT character
			 status	      VSTATUS	   STATUS character

       min number

       time number
		   Set the value of min	or time	to number.  MIN	and  TIME  are
		   used	in Non-Canonical mode input processing (-icanon).

   Combination Modes:
       saved settings
		   Set	the current terminal characteristics to	the saved set-
		   tings produced by the -g option.

       evenp or	parity
		   Enable parenb and cs7; disable parodd.

       oddp	   Enable parenb, cs7, and parodd.

       -parity,	-evenp,	-oddp
		   Disable parenb, and set cs8.

       nl (-nl)	   Enable (disable) icrnl.  In addition	-nl unsets  inlcr  and
		   igncr.

       ek	   Reset ERASE,	ERASE2,	and KILL characters back to system de-
		   faults.

       sane	   Resets  all modes to	reasonable values for interactive ter-
		   minal use.

       tty	   Set the line	discipline to the standard terminal line  dis-
		   cipline TTYDISC.

       crt (-crt)  Set (disable) all modes suitable for	a CRT display device.

       kerninfo	(-kerninfo)
		   Enable  (disable)  the system generated status line associ-
		   ated	with processing	a STATUS  character  (usually  set  to
		   ^T).	  The status line consists of the system load average,
		   the current command name, its process  ID,  the  event  the
		   process  is	waiting	on (or the status of the process), the
		   user	and system times, percent cpu, and current memory  us-
		   age.

		   If the sysctl(8) variable kern.tty_info_kstacks is set to a
		   non-zero value, the status message also includes the	kernel
		   program stack of the	foreground thread.

       columns number
		   The terminal	size is	recorded as having number columns.

       cols number
		   is an alias for columns.

       rows number
		   The terminal	size is	recorded as having number rows.

       dec	   Set	modes suitable for users of Digital Equipment Corpora-
		   tion	systems	(ERASE,	KILL, and INTR characters are  set  to
		   ^?, ^U, and ^C; ixany is disabled, and crt is enabled.)

       extproc (-extproc)
		   If  set,  this  flag	indicates that some amount of terminal
		   processing is being performed by either the terminal	 hard-
		   ware	or by the remote side connected	to a pty.

       raw (-raw)  If  set,  change the	modes of the terminal so that no input
		   or output processing	is performed.  If  unset,  change  the
		   modes  of  the  terminal to some reasonable state that per-
		   forms input and output processing.	Note  that  since  the
		   terminal  driver  no	longer has a single RAW	bit, it	is not
		   possible to intuit what flags were  set  prior  to  setting
		   raw.	  This	means  that unsetting raw may not put back all
		   the setting that were previously in	effect.	  To  set  the
		   terminal  into  a raw state and then	accurately restore it,
		   the following shell code is recommended:

		   save_state=$(stty -g)
		   stty	raw
		   ...
		   stty	"$save_state"

       size	   The size of the terminal is printed as  two	numbers	 on  a
		   single line,	first rows, then columns.

   Compatibility Modes:
       These  modes  remain for	compatibility with the previous	version	of the
       stty command.

       all	   Reports all the terminal modes as with stty -a except  that
		   the control characters are printed in a columnar format.

       everything  Same	as all.

       cooked	   Same	as sane.

       cbreak	   If set, enables brkint, ixon, imaxbel, opost, isig, iexten,
		   and -icanon.	 If unset, same	as sane.

       new	   Same	as tty.

       old	   Same	as tty.

       newcrt (-newcrt)
		   Same	as crt.

       pass8	   The converse	of parity.

       tandem (-tandem)
		   Same	as ixoff.

       decctlq (-decctlq)
		   The converse	of ixany.

       crterase	(-crterase)
		   Same	as echoe.

       crtbs (-crtbs)
		   Same	as echoe.

       crtkill (-crtkill)
		   Same	as echoke.

       ctlecho (-ctlecho)
		   Same	as echoctl.

       prterase	(-prterase)
		   Same	as echoprt.

       litout (-litout)
		   The converse	of opost.

       oxtabs (-oxtabs)
		   Expand (do not expand) tabs to spaces on output.

       tabs (-tabs)
		   The converse	of oxtabs.

       brk value   Same	as the control character eol.

       flush value
		   Same	as the control character discard.

       rprnt value
		   Same	as the control character reprint.

INTERACTION WITH JOB CONTROL
       Modifications  to the terminal settings are treated by job control (see
       termios(4)) same	as writes.  When the stty utility is  executing	 in  a
       background  process  group,  such attempts result in the	kernel sending
       the SIGTTOU signal and stopping the process until its group is returned
       to foreground.  The non-blocking	open of	the terminal device  with  the
       -f  option to stty does not affect the behavior.	 If it is desirable to
       modify the settings from	the background,	sh(1) users might utilize  the
       following idiom:

       (trap ''	TTOU; stty -f /dev/tty sane)

       Note  that changing terminal settings for a running foreground job that
       is not prepared for it might cause inconsistencies.

EXIT STATUS
       The stty	utility	exits 0	on success, and	>0 if an error occurs.

SEE ALSO
       resizewin(1), termios(4), pstat(8)

STANDARDS
       The stty	utility	is expected to be IEEE Std 1003.2 ("POSIX.2") compati-
       ble.  The flags -e and -f are extensions	to the standard.

HISTORY
       A stty command appeared in Version 2 AT&T UNIX.

FreeBSD	13.2		      September	27, 2022		       STTY(1)
