UNAME(1)		    General Commands Manual		      UNAME(1)

NAME
       uname --	display	information about the system

SYNOPSIS
       uname [-abiKmnoprsUv]

DESCRIPTION
       The  uname  command writes the name of the operating system implementa-
       tion to standard	output.	 When options are  specified,  strings	repre-
       senting one or more system characteristics are written to standard out-
       put.

       The options are as follows:

       -a      Behave as though	the options -m,	-n, -r,	-s, and	-v were	speci-
	       fied.

       -b      Write  the  kernel's linker-generated build-id to standard out-
	       put.

       -i      Write the kernel	ident to standard output.

       -K      Write the FreeBSD version of the	kernel.

       -m      Write the type of the current  hardware	platform  to  standard
	       output.	(make(1) uses it to set	the MACHINE variable.)

       -n      Write the name of the system to standard	output.

       -o      This  is	 a  synonym  for the -s	option,	for compatibility with
	       other systems.

       -p      Write the type of the machine processor architecture  to	 stan-
	       dard   output.	(make(1)  uses	it  to	set  the  MACHINE_ARCH
	       variable.)

       -r      Write the current release level of the kernel to	standard  out-
	       put.  freebsd-version(1)	can be used to print the release level
	       of the userland.

       -s      Write  the name of the operating	system implementation to stan-
	       dard output.

       -U      Write the FreeBSD version of the	user environment.

       -v      Write the version level of this release of the operating	system
	       to standard output.

       If the -a flag is specified, or multiple	flags are specified, all  out-
       put is written on a single line,	separated by spaces.

       The -K and -U flags are intended	to be used for fine grain differentia-
       tion of incremental FreeBSD development and user	visible	changes.  Note
       that  when both of these	two options are	specified, regardless of their
       order, the kernel version would be printed first, followed by the  user
       environment version.

ENVIRONMENT
       An  environment	variable composed of the string	UNAME_ followed	by any
       flag to the uname utility (except for -a) will allow the	 corresponding
       data  to	 be  set  to  the  contents  of	the environment	variable.  See
       uname(3)	for more information.

EXIT STATUS
       The uname utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error	occurs.

EXAMPLES
       The hardware platform (-m) can be different from	the machine's  proces-
       sor architecture	(-p), e.g., on 64-bit PowerPC, -m would	return powerpc
       and -p would return powerpc64.

SEE ALSO
       freebsd-version(1),   feature_present(3),  getosreldate(3),  sysctl(3),
       uname(3), sysctl(8)

STANDARDS
       The uname command is  expected  to  conform  to	the  IEEE  Std	1003.2
       ("POSIX.2") specification.

HISTORY
       The  uname  command  appeared  in  PWB UNIX 1.0,	however	4.4BSD was the
       first Berkeley release with the uname command.

       The -K and -U extension flags appeared in FreeBSD 10.0.	The -b	exten-
       sion flag appeared in FreeBSD 13.0.

FreeBSD	13.2		      September	14, 2022		      UNAME(1)
