RM(1)			    General Commands Manual			 RM(1)

NAME
       rm, unlink -- remove directory entries

SYNOPSIS
       rm [-f |	-i] [-dIRrvWx] file ...
       unlink [--] file

DESCRIPTION
       The  rm	utility	attempts to remove the non-directory type files	speci-
       fied on the command line.  If the permissions of	the file do not	permit
       writing,	and the	standard input device  is  a  terminal,	 the  user  is
       prompted	(on the	standard error output) for confirmation.

       The options are as follows:

       -d      Attempt to remove directories as	well as	other types of files.

       -f      Attempt to remove the files without prompting for confirmation,
	       regardless of the file's	permissions.  If the file does not ex-
	       ist,  do	 not  display  a diagnostic message or modify the exit
	       status to reflect an error.  The	-f option overrides any	previ-
	       ous -i options.

       -i      Request confirmation before attempting to remove	each file, re-
	       gardless	of the file's permissions, or whether or not the stan-
	       dard input device is a terminal.	 The -i	option	overrides  any
	       previous	-f options.

       -I      Request	confirmation  once  if more than three files are being
	       removed or if a directory is being recursively  removed.	  This
	       is  a far less intrusive	option than -i yet provides almost the
	       same level of protection	against	mistakes.

       -P      This flag has no	effect.	 It is kept only for backwards compat-
	       ibility with 4.4BSD-Lite2.

       -R      Attempt to remove the file hierarchy rooted in each file	 argu-
	       ment.   The  -R option implies the -d option.  If the -i	option
	       is specified, the user is prompted for confirmation before each
	       directory's contents are	processed (as well as before  the  at-
	       tempt  is  made to remove the directory).  If the user does not
	       respond affirmatively, the file hierarchy rooted	in that	direc-
	       tory is skipped.

       -r      Equivalent to -R.

       -v      Be verbose when deleting	files, showing them as	they  are  re-
	       moved.

       -W      Attempt	to  undelete  the named	files.	Currently, this	option
	       can only	be used	to recover files covered  by  whiteouts	 in  a
	       union file system (see undelete(2)).

       -x      When removing a hierarchy, do not cross mount points.

       The  rm utility removes symbolic	links, not the files referenced	by the
       links.

       It is an	error to attempt to remove the files /,	. or ...

       When the	utility	is called as unlink, only one argument,	which must not
       be a directory, may be supplied.	 No options may	be  supplied  in  this
       simple  mode of operation, which	performs an unlink(2) operation	on the
       passed argument.	 However, the usual option-end delimiter, --, may  op-
       tionally	precede	the argument.

EXIT STATUS
       The  rm	utility	 exits 0 if all	of the named files or file hierarchies
       were removed, or	if the -f option was specified and all of the existing
       files or	file hierarchies were removed.	If an error occurs,  rm	 exits
       with a value >0.

NOTES
       The  rm	command	uses getopt(3) to parse	its arguments, which allows it
       to accept the `--' option which will cause it to	stop  processing  flag
       options	at that	point.	This will allow	the removal of file names that
       begin with a dash (`-').	 For example:

	     rm	-- -filename

       The same	behavior can be	obtained by using an absolute or relative path
       reference.  For example:

	     rm	/home/user/-filename
	     rm	./-filename

EXAMPLES
       Recursively remove all files contained within the foobar	directory  hi-
       erarchy:

	     $ rm -rf foobar

       Any of these commands will remove the file -f:

	     $ rm -- -f
	     $ rm ./-f
	     $ unlink -f

COMPATIBILITY
       The  rm	utility	differs	from historical	implementations	in that	the -f
       option only masks attempts to  remove  non-existent  files  instead  of
       masking	a  large variety of errors.  The -v option is non-standard and
       its use in scripts is not recommended.

       Also, historical	BSD implementations prompted on	the  standard  output,
       not the standard	error output.

       The  -P option does not have any	effect as of FreeBSD 13	and may	be re-
       moved in	the future.

SEE ALSO
       chflags(1),  rmdir(1),  undelete(2),  unlink(2),	  fts(3),   getopt(3),
       symlink(7)

STANDARDS
       The rm command conforms to .

       The  simplified unlink command conforms to Version 2 of the Single UNIX
       Specification ("SUSv2").

HISTORY
       A rm command appeared in	Version	1 AT&T UNIX.

FreeBSD	13.2		       November	10, 2018			 RM(1)
