WC(1)			    General Commands Manual			 WC(1)

NAME
       wc -- word, line, character, and	byte count

SYNOPSIS
       wc [--libxo] [-Lclmw] [file ...]

DESCRIPTION
       The wc utility displays the number of lines, words, and bytes contained
       in  each	input file, or standard	input (if no file is specified)	to the
       standard	output.	 A line	is defined as a	string of characters delimited
       by a <newline> character.  Characters beyond the	final <newline>	 char-
       acter will not be included in the line count.

       A  word	is  defined as a string	of characters delimited	by white space
       characters.  White space	characters are the set of characters for which
       the iswspace(3) function	returns	true.  If more than one	input file  is
       specified,  a  line of cumulative counts	for all	the files is displayed
       on a separate line after	the output for the last	file.

       The following options are available:

       --libxo
	       Generate	output via libxo(3) in a selection of different	 human
	       and machine readable formats.  See xo_parse_args(3) for details
	       on command line arguments.

       -L      Write  the  length  of  the line	containing the most bytes (de-
	       fault) or characters (when -m is	provided) to standard  output.
	       When  more than one file	argument is specified, the longest in-
	       put line	of all files is	reported as the	 value	of  the	 final
	       "total".

       -c      The  number of bytes in each input file is written to the stan-
	       dard output.  This will cancel out any prior usage  of  the  -m
	       option.

       -l      The  number of lines in each input file is written to the stan-
	       dard output.

       -m      The number of characters	in each	input file is written  to  the
	       standard	output.	 If the	current	locale does not	support	multi-
	       byte  characters,  this	is  equivalent to the -c option.  This
	       will cancel out any prior usage of the -c option.

       -w      The number of words in each input file is written to the	 stan-
	       dard output.

       When  an	option is specified, wc	only reports the information requested
       by that option.	The order of output always takes  the  form  of	 line,
       word,  byte, and	file name.  The	default	action is equivalent to	speci-
       fying the -c, -l	and -w options.

       If no files are specified, the standard input is	used and no file  name
       is  displayed.	The  prompt  will accept input until receiving EOF, or
       [^D] in most environments.

       If wc receives a	SIGINFO	(see the status	argument for stty(1))  signal,
       the  interim  data  will	be written to the standard error output	in the
       same format as the standard completion message.

ENVIRONMENT
       The LANG, LC_ALL	and LC_CTYPE environment variables affect  the	execu-
       tion of wc as described in environ(7).

EXIT STATUS
       The wc utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error occurs.

EXAMPLES
       Count  the  number  of characters, words	and lines in each of the files
       report1 and report2 as well as the totals for both:

	     wc	-mlw report1 report2

       Find the	longest	line in	a list of files:

	     wc	-L file1 file2 file3 | fgrep total

COMPATIBILITY
       Historically, the wc utility was	documented  to	define	a  word	 as  a
       "maximal	 string	of characters delimited	by <space>, <tab> or <newline>
       characters".  The implementation, however, did not handle  non-printing
       characters  correctly  so  that	"  ^D^E	 "  counted as 6 spaces, while
       "foo^D^Ebar" counted as 8 characters.  4BSD systems after 4.3BSD	 modi-
       fied  the implementation	to be consistent with the documentation.  This
       implementation defines a	"word" in terms	of the	iswspace(3)  function,
       as required by IEEE Std 1003.2 ("POSIX.2").

       The  -L option is a non-standard	FreeBSD	extension, compatible with the
       -L option of the	GNU wc utility.

SEE ALSO
       iswspace(3), libxo(3), xo_parse_args(3)

STANDARDS
       The wc utility conforms to IEEE Std 1003.1-2001 ("POSIX.1").

HISTORY
       A wc command appeared in	Version	1 AT&T UNIX.

FreeBSD	13.2			April 11, 2020				 WC(1)
